1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives


2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	In this session we’re going to be focussing on the age-related expectations for Year 5 and 6 in grammar, so that’s in children’s third and fourth year of language learning.  We’re going to look at the assessment grids in more detail, so that you feel confident in assessing the progress that children have made in grammar and we’re going to be looking at some suggested pathways that would help you plan for progression across Year 5 and 6.

Bertram:	We’re also going to look at why some, and indeed, some staff, struggle with grammar, the teaching and learning side of grammar and we look at the range of teaching ideas, how to combat that and help them overcome it and we’ll finish the session by looking at a range of resources around grammar and we’ll showcase one resource in more detail.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	We’re now going to look in more detail at the progression matrix.  On the left hand side, you can see the statutory requirements for languages at Key Stage 2 and then you can see that broken down into Year 5 and Year 6.  So starting off with the nouns, pronouns, articles and adjectives, you’ll see that in Year 5, children should ideally be able to use adjectives increasingly correctly, in terms of the verb endings and moving into Year 6, they move on to adverbs, and also their understanding about how politeness is conveyed by different forms of language in different target languages.

	In terms of verbs, children obviously have been looking at the regular verbs in Year 3 and 4 and they’re moving on to conjugating, simple irregular verbs.  They also are able to now start putting negatives into simple sentences. 

	By the end of Year 6, children should be using modem verbs and also starting to recognise the past tense and once this may sound daunting, often children are quite confident when they’re give the structure to use that structure without having to have full knowledge of the whole range of verb endings for the whole of the past tense and children then are beginning to use negative sentences fairly consistently and accurately.

3.2: Progression Matrix (continued)

Bertram:	So, on this slide, you can see their progression between Year 5 and Year 6 and we look at key features and patterns of language, so especially word order and then how they apply their knowledge of – how words are – the order they come in a sentence, in a question, in a statement and also where words go and how words are shaped to convey future or past intent and then from their understanding to actually producing an orally written piece accurately using three to five key grammatical features without making too many mistakes and it’s understandable so we look at their word order feature intent question formation connectives. 

	The second part of that is also that they’re understanding prefixes, suffixes and how these common letter strings, in English and other languages, can help them extend their vocabulary as they carry meaning and then they use that knowledge to understand and explain the key features in the text.

4.	Year 5 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	So here you can see the grammar section from the assessment grid for Year 5.  And again, quite a long list of expectations here for the children by the end of Year 5, but hopefully this will be building up in the work that they’ve been doing through Year 3 and 4.   We’re going to take a look in a moment at how you’ll be able to assess that through a range of activities you’ll be doing anyway in the classroom with the children.

4.2: Example

Rebecca:	So in order to assess grammar in Year 5.  We’re not looking at standalone tests, grammar tests, and grammar exams for children, we’re looking to assess their grammar through the work that they’re doing in writing, reading, speaking, listening.  So here you can see an exemplification of an assessment activity in Year 5, the transcript of that, of what a child, by the end of Year 5 should hopefully be able to do, in terms of their writing and you’ll be able to see the grammatical structures that they can use in this and how you can use those against the assessment grids to see where the children have achieved the grammar expectations through their written work.

4.3: Example

Rebecca:	And moving on to looking at assessing grammar through speaking and listening, you can see some transcripts here of expectations for the end of Year 5 in speaking and listening and, again, if children are able to use this vocabulary correctly in speaking and listening exercises, then, very clearly, you can see that they can meet the grammar expectations for Year 5.

4.4: Example

Rebecca:	So we’re looking back here to the assessment activity for reading in Year 5 and we’re seeing how this can be used to help us assess grammar without doing a separate grammar activity.   For the children to be able to do the reading assessment here, to read this text and do the activities that accompany this text, they need to have a good understanding of the grammar structures which you can see in the text here, so you’d be able to assess children’s understanding of the grammar expectations at Year 5 through their ability to do this reading activity.

5.	Year 6 – Assessment 
 
5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	Here, we’ve extracted a section under grammar taken from the Year 6 assessment grid and, as before, it does look quite a daunting long list.  Many bullet points compared to the other skills.  However, as we try to show in this session, you are assessing this through every task that you do in the classroom and especially through their regular other skills, listening, reading, writing, and speaking.  You can tick off many of those bullet points in one task and it might be an idea to have a copy of that next to you as you look at the next slides.

5.2: Example

Bertram:	This is the assessment we’ve put together.  A sample assessment for speaking, for the end of Key Stage 2 and you can see the first two levels they’re merging and they’re expected and in red you can see how the grammar ties in with that, with opinions, negatives, longer sentences.

5.3: Example

Bertram: 	Here’s the exceeding level.  Just to reassure you, we wouldn’t imagine this to be produced as a speech in test conditions, but again, this draws from all the learning they’ve done in Key Stage 2 is being put together over time and are presented with some support with this visual or some key words or sentence starters, but again, you can see how it covers all the grammar points that they’re expected to have mastered by the end of Key Stage 2.

5.4: Example

Bertram:	Here is the reading stimulus for the sample assessment Year 6 and as you will see in the next slide, to be able to access the key information and do the exercises, the students automatically demonstrate a high level of competency in terms of their grammar skills.




5.5: Example

Bertram:	So once students have completed the reading side of this task, it can be used as a springboard to then have a discussion about the grammar or asking some follow-up grammar questions and you can see they might have demonstrated that, in they can move from the first to the third person by saying, well Kevin thinks this and that about his fans and he thinks this using the first person.

5.6: Example

Bertram:	The final assessment example we’re looking at is the writing task and to reiterate that this is the task not produced in exam conditions but the task covering loads of language familiar from Year 3, 4 and 5 and 6 and on familiar topics put together over the course of a few months or even a couple of terms and then being put together like a portfolio of work and then you can see, you should be able to produce this in French, Spanish or German, or your chosen type of language that students will demonstrate a very good level of grammatical understanding and accuracy.

6.	Suggested Pathway 

6.1: Year 5 Term 1

Rebecca:	So here, we’re going to look at some suggested pathways for teaching grammar through Year 5.  So by the end of Term 1, we’re looking at children being able to use adjectives correctly and also being able to spot patterns in regular verbs.  They’ll have a range of question words that they can use and they’ll also be able to form a negative sentence in the first, second and third person.

6.2: Year 5 Term 2
	
Rebecca: 	By the end of Term 2 in year 5, children will be able to apply the patterns that they’ve learnt about in regular verbs and use this to new verbs.  They’ll also be able to start conjugating some common irregular verbs.  In addition to this, they’re going to be using ways to express negation and also they’ll recognise future tense.  They won’t be necessarily using the future tense but they will recognise the format of it and how to use that in a simple way.

6.3: Year 5 Term 3

Rebecca:	So by the end of Year 5, children should be using up to three to five adjectives correctly, in terms of word order and ending but become increasingly confident with verbs, particularly those regular verbs where they can identify verb endings and use those in a range of context and they’ll start to feel more confident with the common irregular verbs as well.  And moving towards the understanding of the future tense and how it can be formed – not necessarily being able to do it, but realising certain patterns form that future intent.

6.4: Year 6 Term 1

Bertram:	In Year 6, we’re looking at putting that grammatical knowledge to greater accurate use, so you can see they extended their conjugation of present tense verbs but also putting that in a descriptive context.  Their future plans with fluency in using the future tense and they can use negative tenses correctly to communicate, not just picking it out in reading or a listening task.

6.5: Year 6 Term 2

Bertram:	In Term 2, Year 6, we’re covering adverbs, adjectives in greater depth.  We’re looking at present feature tense.  We’re starting to look for patterns in the past tense sentences, not using it, but spotting it in a text and then how – what similarities they can see and we can see not just a negative, not a sentence, but also other forms of expressing a negation.

6.6: Year 6 Term 3

Bertram:	So, by the end of Key Stage 2, in their last term of year 6, they can understand and use a wide range of adjectives, adverbs.  They can use the present and future tense, some past tense in the fixed phrases or key verbs, like was and had and they can spot the past tense when it’s used and the standard, using their verb knowledge and can also use a number of verbs in a condition I would like, I could do this or I should do this – can fix phrases without going too much into the underlying grammar.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Grammar

Rebecca:	So here we’re going to take a look at some of the potential barriers for teaching grammar and ways to overcome these barriers.  So, one of the main problems of teaching grammar is that staff don’t always have the confidence to teach grammar in a language that they’re not really familiar with, so we do need to give staff the confidence in teaching grammar with the target language and to also help staff teach the rules for grammar and how to deal with exceptions to the rules.  Things that we need to do, to make sure the grammar is taught effectively, is to ensure that it’s taught across all of the different strands, so taught in writing, reading, speaking, listening and the grammar points are made explicit, especially as the demands for grammar have been raised in your curriculum.  We also need to make sure that the grammar is purposeful and relevant, so we need to find ways of making the grammar activities interesting for our children.

7.2: Teaching Ideas

Bertram:	We’ve put together a range of teaching ideas and activities, all based around grammar and just to highlight some of those in a bit more detail, so it obviously starts with the more regular highlighting, colour-coding things in the text, post-it notes and then you could that as a base for activities, like a relay race, so, say, put them in teams and then give them all the first task, that they find five adjectives.  Okay, as soon as you’ve found them, bring them back and you get the next task.  Okay, now find the true negative sentences.  Okay, find the past tense phrase, so it’s covering a wide number of grammar points with a quite complicated text potentially which is looking for detail, looking for those grammar structures they’ve just been learning about.  Other activities – they come up with their own song, Dan’s Rap, whatever it is, is supposed to develop – remember the rule and also due when the rule doesn’t apply for those exceptions and then use that to teach each other and a final activity I wanted to talk about is when you give students grammar categories in groups.  Let’s say you, five students you, the masculine you, feminine you, past, future, present tense and you read out a series of statements or you read through a text and as the students hear or notice their allocated grammar point, they perform a certain action or make a noise or stand up, or write them down to make it more interactive.

8.	Recourses

8.1: Suggested Resources

Bertram:	Here you can see a selection of resources all to do with grammar.  I’d like to highlight No. 3, the French song database which is excellent if you’re looking for songs around a certain grammar point and that’s something that’s very hard to find and songs obviously where to engage the children.  Obviously, the songs might often be too difficult on a linguistic level, in terms of understanding what the song’s about, but you could just summarise the song for them and then just do some games activities around the grammar point that is in that song, by giving them a transcript or having a gap-fill exercise by having them, like I said before, perform an action when they hear the grammar point in the song and eventually learning the song and some accurate templates for that grammar point.  For Spanish, there is a wealth of songs on You Tube where teachers, especially from Latin America, have worked with their classes to produce a rap or a song, often based on current hits in the charts and using a grammar point to teach it and that might be an excellent activity then as well, for yourselves to do with your children once you’ve watched a couple of those to come up with your own song and upload that.

9.	Have a Go!

9.1 Demonstration

9.2 END