1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	By the end of this session, you will have developed an understanding of the age-related expectations for Year 5 and 6 in speaking and listening.  The more we talk about year 5 and 6, we’re looking at children who are in their third and fourth year of language learning.  You will also feel confident to assess progress in speaking and listening by using the assessment grids which we’ll be demonstrating later on.  You will also feel confident in planning for progression by using the suggested pathways that we’ve prepared.

Bertram:	We’ll then look at factors that might demotivate students and put them off listening and speaking, common barriers and look at a range of teaching techniques and ideas how to overcome those listening and speaking specific barriers and finally, we’ll look at – we’ll signpost you to a few resources and we’ll showcase one of them in a bit more detail.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	We’re now going to look in more detail at the age-related expectations for Year 5 and 6 in speaking and listening.  In the white box you’ll see the DfE statutory requirements and how it’s been broken down and into Year 5 and 6.  In terms of listening in Year 5 and 6, you will gradually develop confidence to listen to longer texts.  In Year 5, they may have to listen to short messages and note the main points, whereas, by the time they’re in Year 6, they’ll be listening to longer texts.  Also, they’ll be listening to unfamiliar vocabulary and starting to be able to identify the main points of this, as opposed to Year 5, when it’s more focused on classroom instructions and a range of questions based on the topics that they’re familiar with.

3.2: Progression Matrix (continued)

Bertram:	So, in terms of speaking, we’re now moving from the short phrases and sentences. They learned in their first two years of language learning to in Year 5, expressing unjustifying opinions or I like this because, ask me for an opinion, having conversations about topics they have been learning about and then towards the end of Key Stage 2, they have a range of opinions and they can connect those complex sentences, so, I like football because it’s exciting, but I don’t like tennis because it’s boring, those kind of – and then have a conversation about different topics, expressing those opinions and then also they can have a range of sentences in the target language that they can ask for clarification.

 3.3: Progression Matrix (continued)

Bertram:	So, on this slide of the progression matrix, we’re looking at the phonic knowledge and how that increases towards the end of Key Stage 2 and that they then pronounce the range of other language and it’s more that they’re increasing confidence and accuracy over the last two years, than any specific skill they’re adding and also when they speak, that their intonation is increasingly accurate and that they’re confident about it and the last point with the presentation is that obviously they prepare something over time, it could be pieced together for a piece of work that they’ve done over the course of Year 6 and it would also be a lot of language that they use in Year 3 and 4, but that all comes together at the end, although they could give a presentation that they’ve prepared in short paragraphs, put it together and present that to the class.

4.	Year 5 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	And you can see here, the assessment grid for Year 5 in speaking and listening.  This matches up with the progression matrix so that you can use a progression matrix to help you plan and then use the assessment grid at the end to highlight the children who are making the expected progress, or working towards or working above.

4.2: Examples

Rebecca:	So here you can see some exemplar materials of what speaking and listening will look like by the end of Year 5 and if you look in the expected, children are given the opportunity, not just to present about themselves, or present on certain topics, but they’re presenting across a range of text types, so in this example, they’re presenting instructions, but you equally might use poetry, might use plays, so this is the example of what standard the children are reaching.  You can see the children who are exceeding, they’re using additional features, such as adverbs, adverbial phrases, to extend themselves.

5.	Year 6 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	So here you can see the section of speaking and listening taken from the Year 6 assessment grid, again, based on the matrix we discussed earlier and bullet points allowing you to judge whether your student or your class have reached – are emerging, expected or above where they should be.



5.2: Examples

Bertram:	So we’ve put together three illustrations of what speaking could look like at the end of their fourth year of learning one language, so, in English, so you can adapt that and you can see, as I mentioned before, there is a lot of language that they’ve started, that they didn’t just learn in Year 6, it goes spirally over the Year 3, 4 and 5 curriculum as well.  So, it might look like it’s a lot of things to talk about, but it’s actually building on what they’ve learned in previous years and they might just piece that together over the course of Year 6, so they can present that at the end of year 6, and you can see the difference in emerging and expected – we’ve focused on linking several sentences, what they can and can’t do, it’s present tense, whether it’s also an I would like in there, their opinions and the connectors for that and a bit more detail as well and they expect it and on the next slide, you’ll see exceeding. 

5.3: Examples (continued)

Bertram:	So here is the example where a child would exceed their age-related expectations and you can see, it’s not massively more than they expected, it’s more a few phrases that are more complex or using a complex phrase several times. So the example we’ve put in here is, if they live in the South of France, they can go to the beach and it’s repeated, that comes up twice.  There are a lot of children and they have lunch at school and also got the after lunch lessons before they go home, there’s that extra bit of detail – using the more complex structures more confidently and more regularly with greater accuracy would then mean they exceed their age-related expectations.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 5 Term 1

Rebecca:	So here you see a suggested pathway to help the children achieve the age-related expectations by Year 5 and it’s broken down into Term 1, 2 and 3.  These are suggestions and they’re not a set way of doing it, it’s just a way that we feel can be helpful if you’re unsure what your children should be achieving at certain points through the year.  So, in Term 1, we suggested that by the end of Term 1, children should be asking for an opinion such as what’s your favourite, rather than, do you like, then moving on using those more complex structures and there’ll always be – might be able to identify information from texts that have additional information to something other than just in their topic that they’ve been learning about and the intonation and pronunciation is becoming more confident as we mentioned earlier.

6.2: Year 5 Term 2

Rebecca:	In Term 2, a speaking activity that your children might be able to achieve would be re-telling a story using drama and again, this is a suggestion, it’s to change what the children are doing using different text types, rather than sticking just with presentations about themselves.  The listening activities would include listening to that wider range of classroom instructions, so rather than just the line up and put your hand up, it’s how much time do you need, for example, in sport of design and technology, and again, gradually increasing more and more and using the intonation correctly.

6.3: Year 5 Term 3

Rebecca:	So, by the end of the third term of Year 5, that’s obviously the third year of language learning, children will be able to justify their opinions using because and adding expert extra information.  They’ll also be able to give a short presentation about something based on a familiar topic, something that you’ve maybe been focusing on that term.  They will also be able to pick out the main points but for short listening text, short dialogue, short instructions and understand some of the key points and that maybe done by highlighting on a sheet or making bullet point notes about what they’ve been listening to and we’re suggesting that children, by the end of Year 5, will be able to pronounce five to ten long words accurately using the phonemes that they’re familiar with.

6.4: Year 6 Term 1

Bertram:	So, by Christmas, by the end of their first term in Year 6 or their fourth year of language learning, we’d expect them to combine a lot of the language that they’ve previously learnt, to be able to have a longer conversation – three, four, five question and answers on a topic they’ve studied.  They understand the clarification phrases and listen to slightly longer texts and all the vocabulary they’ve learned up to this point.  They can pronounce that confidently.

6.5: Year 6 Term 2

Bertram:	Around Easter-time, we’d expect them to be able to use those clarification phrases themselves and, show what you mean, what do you mean, and more regularly in the classroom as well as being able to express and justify their opinions “and we can see there…”, “I like this because…”, “but I don’t like…”, “although I love …I hate…”, you can see the range of connectors and then opinion phrases that they use at the end of their language learning experience in primary school on quite a wide range: spoken a language, different text types that they can listen and respond to and mostly pronounce their new sentences accurately. 

6.6: Year 6 Term 3

Bertram:	And at the very end of their fourth year of language learning, Year 6, that we expect them to combine everything they’ve learned in those presentations where you saw an example earlier of something that they’ve built up and they can talk three to five minutes about a topic they’ve studied in which they’ve prepared over time and answer simple questions in English or the target language on it, they can understand and agree the screen with another opinion which is why we’ve put that other suggestion of following a debate because that focus, or whatever topic they’ve studied, what they think about it, exchange their points of view, agree and disagree with each other and that’s also kind of more it’ll be the listening as well, that they’ve several longer sentences and a familiar theme with some unfamiliar language.  They know key bits but also some detail and they can sustain their pronunciation and intonation for a longer period of time.  That’s the key thing, rather than just getting the key words right, they can, throughout their three to five minutes, they stay on using the right pronunciation and intonation.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Listening

Rebecca:	So we’re going to have a quick look at some of the potential barriers for listening and often this is thought to be one of the least popular skills and in primary schools, we maybe don’t do enough of giving children the opportunity to sit and listen and to understand and decode what they’ve been hearing.  So we must make sure that it doesn’t seem like a listening test for a start and to try and move away from abstract text to something that they can actually relate to.  I think what can be very helpful of the children is, that they understand that even if they don’t understand every word, they still need to concentrate and focus because they can pick up the name meaning other text by listening to key words that they do understand and thinking about context and logic as they would if they were listening to spoken text in their own language.

7.2: Teaching Ideas

Bertram:	So here are some teaching ideas, how to make listening less feel like a test or like something they pass or fail, in that they can prepare it before with their predictions, what do you think is going to be in the listening and then they could test their predictions, once they’ve listened to it, which words did you hear?  Were you right?  Obviously, they can respond physically, kinaesthetically to the text, to what they’re hearing to, so, do this action when you hear this word or answer one, a song – just to emphasise, obviously, there’s a wealth of songs out there and we’ll signpost some websites a bit later on for that.  I mean whiteboards respond by draw encircling writing and then they can see how then something we emphasise throughout, how the skills are all integrated really, it’s not just a listening standalone skill and obviously images, transcript, where you can respond, matching up words with pictures

7.3: Potential Barriers for Speaking

Rebecca:	So, here are some of the potential barriers for speaking.  Obviously, the children’s cognitive levels are much more advanced than their language levels in the target language, so they need to have lots of variety in repeating the same phrases, but in lots of different ways and they need to have those opportunities on a very regular basis, so drip-feeding through the day, not waiting for a wild language lesson once every week, every fortnight, they need to be able to have the opportunity to speak and the opportunity to speak spontaneously as well in the target language.  

	Another problem that children find with speaking, is that they can be put off by the spelling of the word, so if they’re unsure how to pronounce it, this may make them hesitate, so they obviously need to develop their confidence, not only just to have a go, but also developing their confidence with that, with the phonemes and have a better understanding of how to pronounce words.

	And another issue that we can sometimes encounter is our class teachers.  Sometimes they need to develop their own confidence in the target language.

7.4: Teaching Ideas

Bertram:	So here’s a range of different games and activities to break down those barriers and to make speaking a more, a really regular task and also lets the children use their relatively limited language over and over again, so they become more independent.  So a good example is, there’s Chinese whispers, things like the speed dating or those question/answer chains where you’ve got two teams competing against each other, how quickly can they pass the question and answer from one to the other, around the classroom and that also works lovely with the pass the bomb which you can – you know, that children’s party game you can buy that probably really cheaply and then pass it around and it takes the person, where it goes off, you know, and they lose a point for their team and so on.

8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Rebecca:	So here you can see a list of recommended websites that will not only help your pupils to develop their language skills but they’ll also give you a class teacher’s confidence, particularly if they’re unsure about pronunciation of some of the key vocabulary that they need to use.  Obviously, the BBC ones are very reliable, but a couple we can recommend here are No. 7, which has French songs and what we like about this, it’s been organised by grammar points, so you can link this very carefully to the grammar teaching of the curriculum in MFL and No. 8, this is a nice website which has French, German and Spanish songs and they’ve got a gap for the lyrics, so really useful for those listening activities and really engaging for children in upper Key Stage 2.

9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration


