1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	By the end of this session, you’ll have developed a good understanding of the age-related expectations for Year 5 and 6 in reading and by that, it’s for pupils who are in their third and fourth year of language learning.  You’ll also become confident in assessing progress in reading, using the assessment grids that we’ll be modelling later for you.  We will also be sharing some pathways to help you plan for progression across Year 5 and 6.

Bertram:	And then, towards the end of the session, we’ll have a look at why some children find reading a difficult skill to acquire and how we can help them in overcoming that by some teaching strategies and some specific resources for reading and we’ll also showcase a few resources that are particularly good for reading whilst signposting you to some other resources as well.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	So we’re going to look at progression in reading in Year 5 and 6 in a bit more detail now.  On the left of the screen in the white boxes, you can see the statutory requirements from the national curriculum.  We’ve taken these and looked at how they would develop across Year 5 and 6.  So, in Year 5, we’re expecting children to be able to start to read text with increasing grammatical complex and they can understand the main points of those.  When we talk about appreciating stories and songs and poems in the target language, we’re not expecting the children to discuss them in the target language but to read them in the target language and then to express an opinion in English.  We’re also thinking that by this point in Year 5, children feel fairly confident in looking for the meaning of an unfamiliar word, using a range of resources or strategies, for example, using dictionaries and starting to think about online dictionaries as well as paper dictionaries.

Bertram:	And if we look at the end the fourth year of language learning, we’d expect them to move on to texts.  Obviously, there can be all sorts of texts.  We’re not talking about in short stories only, but they can cope with some unfamiliar language in more complex grammatical structures.  They will also be able to – based on their reading, they’ll be able to talk about it in, like I said, appreciate it and say why they prefer some reading to another.  That could be in English or the target language and finally, they’d be able to, instead of just sentences or phrases, to decode a text, obviously, age-appropriate using all their grammatical knowledge.

4.	Year 5 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	So here you can see, the section from the assessment grids for Year 5 and we’ve highlighted the reading targets.  So by the end of Year 5, by the end of the children’s third year of language learning, they should be able to achieve these three targets in reading.  

4.2: Examples

Rebecca:	So now we’ll take a look at some materials that you might want to use for assessment of reading in Year 5.  We’ve taken an example from the Mary Glasgow publication, which is particularly appealing for children and relevant to them and we quite like the style of the postcards and the short boxes with text in.  This is a nice style to use for Year 5 because it also has the words at the bottom, for their unfamiliar vocabulary but the vocabulary within the text contains a lot of cognates and it’s also, children can be aided by the illustrations and the photos to help them gain a good understanding, using this text and there are a range of activities that you’ll be able to use to assess the children’s understanding.

4.3: Examples (continued)

Rebecca:	So once children have had the chance to read through the text and identify some of the unfamiliar words, we would anticipate that children who are working towards the age-related expectation would be able to complete an activity, such as Activity A, where they’re just stating whether statements are true or false.  Children who are working at age-related expectations, in addition to being able to complete the true or false, would be able to do an activity such as completing a table and completing whether a museum’s modern or classical, what they’re famous for and if a child is working above the age-related expectations, the additional tasks that we would hope they’d be able to complete, would be one such as identifying the museums correctly and reading the text and then putting the correct letter into the circles.  You’ll see that these activities don’t involve the children writing because they are to assess the children’s reading ability.

5.	Year 6 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	So on this slide, we’ve taken the selection from the assessment grid for Year 6 and the three bullet points that relate to reading, so these are the three objectives, or that’s what children should be able to do at the end of the fourth year of language learning in Year 6.

5.2: Examples

Bertram:	So here we’ve got another example from the Mary Glasgow magazines, so interview with a skier and again, you can see the different type of text, interview, non-fiction for a magazine, lots of cognates and also a glossary at the bottom for some words that their children wouldn’t have learned in class.

5.3: Examples (continued)

Bertram:	So here’s the task to go with the interview with the skier and you can see, and when children are working towards the age-related expectations, they will be able to fill in the basic information, French and English or English with some inaccuracies on an expected level when they meet their expectations, they would be able to fill in most of the information showing a good understanding, still with a few mistakes, obviously, and then if they were above the age-related expectations, you would expect them to fill in pretty much all the information accurately.  As an extension, you could think to show their understanding of the text, they could talk about how does the skier feel when he wins, based on what you’ve read about it, or similar question that they answer in English.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 5 Term 1

Rebecca:	In order to help you plan to help children achieve the age-related expectations by the end of year 5, we’ve created some suggested pathways that go term by term.  So, for example, by the end of Term 1 in Year 5, children will be reading a wide range of materials but would suggest that if you need interviews, such as the ones we’ve shown from the Mary Glasgow magazines, that type of thing and a range of authentic non-fiction tests, so that might include menus from restaurants and things like that.  Children will be able to respond in English, expressing their own opinions in English and then continue to develop their vocabulary and they’re recognising words across a range of context.

6.2: Year 5 Term 2

Rebecca:	So, by the end of Term 2, children should have had the opportunity to read a wide range of fiction text and they should have the opportunity to choose from a range of texts that you have available in the classroom.  They will be able to respond but we’re using opinions, again in English and complete true/false activities.  They’ll gradually increase their vocabulary, including things such as negatives, adjectives and questions.  

6.3: Year 5 Term 3

Rebecca:	So, by the end of Term 3 in Year 5, so that’s like children’s third year of language learning, they will be selecting books and choosing books with unfamiliar language because they’ll have developed the confidence to decode that language, using cues that they would be using when reading in English but also they’ll be able to select the most useful resources to help them to find out unfamiliar language such as online dictionaries, or using books, or using their own word books that they’ve been creating.

6.4: Year 6 Term 1

Bertram:	So, from the same for Year 6, in their last year of language learning in primary school, we’ve developed this – the suggested pathways and so by Christmas in their last year of language learning, they would be able to access a wide range of texts, further develop their answers in French.  They show an understanding of present and future tenses in the text when they can answer questions relating to that and they use the more standard dictionaries, rather than address through their own word lists to look up words and they can also, in a text, look at the different structures and the tenses and the adjectives.

6.5: Year 6 Term 2

Bertram:	So by the Easter time, in the their last year, you can see what they’re supposed to achieve and also you can see the link to grammar as the grammar enables them to access those more complicated texts and to make meaning out of them.  So, you can see – and they can also think, like, writing questions for a partner, so they show coming up with the questions for a text, well surely they’ve understood the text.  They use the more sophisticated dictionary or they’re quicker at accessing words and they can talk about why they prefer certain materials to others.

6.6: Year 6 Term 3

Bertram:	And towards the end of their fourth year of language learning in primary school, they’re fully developed, being able to access a wide range of text types, they can cope with a good amount of unfamiliar language, depending on the ability of the child, but they’ve got a range of tools and strategies to find out meanings, to make meanings.  They would be exposed to using a thesaurus to expand their vocabulary based on their reading materials, looking at why certain word choices were made, what other word choices could have been made and what that means.  That obviously is closely linked to their grammatical understanding of a text and they can link, that’s obviously very integrated with their writing and their speaking and they can use that vocabulary also actively.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Reading

Rebecca:	So some of the potential barriers for reading are firstly that children can feel a little bit nervous when they’re faced with a text in the foreign language and so it’s important that that gets broken down for them and they’re given the confidence to have a go with that.  It also can be difficult to find texts that are age-appropriate because, of course, their cognitive level of understanding will be far higher than their ability to read the text in the target language.  Also, we need to make sure that children develop the reading techniques that they’ve been developing in English to ensure that they can understand the texts and progress in that target language.  Also, often in primary language, we put a lot of emphasis on the speaking and listening and we need to make sure that we do have the opportunities for reading on a regular basis.


7.2: Teaching Ideas 1

Rebecca:	So developing children’s reading skills in the target language goes hand in hand with developing their reading skills in English and so you’ll be using all the same techniques that you do for teaching reaching and English, so using a range of strategies, such as, reading in a group, partner reading, individual reading and then having chosen text with the focused learning activities and we can find a lot of really good examples of that in the Mary Glasgow magazines, but obviously there are other examples and you can create your own.  It’s also important to have a wide range of reading materials available for the children you can see here, not just stories, but poems, songs, magazines, comics, things that are appropriate for the children to make sure that they are wanting to choose the books and they are feeling that they’re reading them for interest and enjoyment and we’ve often found that children do go in certain – because even if they’re not familiar with all the vocabulary, if those books are engaging for them.

	Also, again, as I said earlier, you’re looking at using the reading strategies so the children are decoding, they’re looking for clues, for example, in the illustrations, in the context of the book which will enable them to decode the meaning, without necessarily having to stop to look for every single new piece of vocabulary.  Also, to enable the children to access the text, then they will need that support in using glossaries, word lists and dictionaries, so that they can feel independent when they take a text with unfamiliar language in.

7.3: Teaching Ideas 2

Bertram:	So we’ve put together some teaching ideas here, to try and break down those barriers to reading.  They’ve obviously also seen it from word searches, crosswords, on a more basic level, on a word level, if you’re really looking at that.  Rebuilding a text, matching images with texts and then obviously multiple choice questions, surveys, those kind of things and also reading tasks, writing questions for someone else to read and you can see how reading is, like all the other skills, is not a standalone skill that you can just teach separately, it does all link with the speaking, listening and writing and we’ve given some examples of reading – they’ve written something as apart from them doing a writing task on and also to do a speaking task in the same way.




8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Rebecca:	So we’ve put together a list of some recommended websites that you can use and, again, you’ll see there, the Mary Glasgow publications which we really highly recommend.  So, although that’s a paid for resource, one suggestion would be to either see if your partner secondary school has some old issues that you could borrow, because they would last you a long time with the material in them, or indeed, work with a cluster of schools to get a subscription.  Another company that we like is the European School Books, because they have a really wide range of very engaging and appealing high quality text that would be very useful to start building up a library in your target language.  You can see also the Northern Ireland curriculum has some very good activities and games to develop primary languages.

8.2: Suggested Resources (continued)

Rebecca:	And here you can see some examples for supporting reading, although a lot of these are song-based or speaking-based, they have the text on the screen, so it’s, I suppose, a bit like a karaoke-style, so the children, as well as hearing the vocabulary, they’re actually seeing the written word at the same time, so that’s really useful for you.
	
9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration

9.2: Demonstration

Bertram:	Here, a French example, the Bonjour de France, is, when you look at it, it looks more like a website for secondary, for higher levels, but there is actually a lot of material that is highly accessible for primary children to use and you can see here, something cross-curricular, so it actually doesn’t need much language, it ties in very well with maths and just losing a lot of cognates to apply that in another curriculum area.

9.3: Demonstration

Bertram:	Again, yabla is similar in that you can pay and subscribe to it, there are some free clips available and as you can see, you play it, and it’s subtitled in both languages.  You can select and switch on and off and then you can play again by where it plays and it pauses the dialogue or the phone conversation and you have to type in the word, so it is kind of a mixed reading and writing activity.

9.4: END
