1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	In this session, we’re going to be focusing on the age-related expectations for Year 5 and 6 in writing and this is for children who are in their third and fourth year of sustained language learning.  So, although some of the age-related expectations might seem a little bit high, we’re going to talk you through how you could help the children achieve those, building on the work that they will have done already in Year 3 and 4.  We’ll also be looking in details at the assessment grid, so you can see how you can assess the writing progress and then we’ve developed some pathways to enable you to make plan for progress across Year 5 and 6, across each term.

Bertram:	And we’ll finish the session by looking at the problems that children could experience and that could put them off writing and obviously how to overcome those by a range of different approaches and practical teaching tips and finally we’ll look at a range of different resources that could help you in supporting the children in their writing progress and we’ll demonstrate one resource in a bit more detail.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	So here you can see the progression matrix for Year 5 and 6.  You can see the statutory requirements in the white boxes on the left hand side of the government expectations for children by the end of Year 5 and 6 in language learning.  So by the end of Year 5, children are starting to write longer compound sentences and they’re beginning to adapt sentences and short texts, often with support, but beginning to make changes, depending on the topic that you’re doing.

Bertram:	By the end of their language learning experience, you can see in the writing, it’s hard to separate out from the grammar, obviously, because they’ll showcase their grammatical knowledge and accuracy through their writing more than anything.  Well, and their speaking, sorry, and you can see them moving to complex sentences, to paragraphs that could come from work they’ve written over the course of the year and covers topics they’ve done in Year 3, 4 and 5 as well.  So, kind of, everything comes together at the end of Key Stage 2 that they can produce a longer extended text and like a piece of writing and they obviously need all their grammatical knowledge to produce that with accuracy and also a dictionary or online tool to extend their vocabulary independently.

4.	Year 5 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	So here you can see the assessment grids for writing in Year 5.  If the children manage to meet all the objectives that you can see here, then they have reached the age-related expectations for Year 5.

4.2: Example

Rebecca:	So here you can see a transcript of what writing might look like by the end of Year 5 and something like this, which is a script for doing a weather report, so it may be something that they’ve prepared a script for ready to film.  It’s something that the children will have been working on for a number of weeks.  It’s not expected that children sit down and take a test at the end of Year 5 and produce something like this.  It would have been a topic to do with weather, looking at the vocabulary for weather, looking at certain phrases and sentences and then children should be able to produce this in the target language and, again, they’ll be using the tool, such as dictionaries and you may have a glossary for them to use as well and some children may need further support with writing frames.

5.	Year 6 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	Here you see the section on writing taken from the Year 6 assessment grid and, again, if the children have met those four bullet points and show that in their writing, then they’ve met the age-related expectations for Year 6.  

5.2: Example

Bertram:	So here is an example of a piece of writing that the student would produce at the end of Year 6 and I know that, from feedback we’ve had from delivering this course and from colleagues, that at first glance, this looks quite a daunting prospect to you for children to write this.  If we break this down and look at the sentences, so you can see the first sentence, or the first two sentences, they will have produced that regularly in Year 3 and Year 4 and you can see throughout, there’s bits, like, I really like P.E, I play football, I don’t like history, so you can see those sentences are taking – they’ll have had plenty of practice in their first couple of years of language learning.  My favour flavour pizza is cheese and then also there’s obviously a lot of phrases and adverbs and then structures that are from Year 4 or 5 and Year 6.  And we wouldn’t, again, expect the children to produce this in a test in the hall in exam conditions, like they would do for GCSE, it’s produced over the course of Year 6, it draws on previous knowledge.  They don’t write the whole thing in one go, but over the course of Year 6, by the end of Year 6, they should have produced something like this on the topics they have covered throughout their Key Stage 2 language experience.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 5

Rebecca:	Here you can see a suggested pathway that we’ve developed to help children make the required progress in Year 5.  I must stress, this is a suggested path, when it will obviously depend on the topics you’re teaching and the progress that your children are making, but we feel there needs to be a big focus in Year 5 on children developing their understanding of the connectives, basic connectives, to enable them to write compound sentences by the end of Term 3.  In Term 1 and 2 also, from the beginning, to make sure adaptations to longer text and these need to be across a range of text types.  So, for example, we’ve said here, recipes, weather reports, poems, anything obviously that’s interesting for your children, that gives them that wider opportunity for writing and so by the end of Term 3, they can adapt and edit text and they can also include additional information using the knowledge that they have got in vocabulary on the topic that you’re doing, and gradually they’re building on their use of a dictionary to help them in spelling unfamiliar words.

6.2: Year 6

Bertram:	So you can see here the overview we’ve put together for your children to be able to reach their age-related expectations by the end of Year 6, broken down over the three terms and you can see, again, how it’s really impossible to separate out from the grammar in that supports the structure and the accuracy in their writing.  

Now, you can see how we extend the connectives to then put together a simple text but using complex sentences and then over the course of the year, they would have produced several pieces, on a theme or with connected themes that would then result in that piece we looked at earlier and you can see there are several previously written short texts, produce a portfolio of work and we, again, can’t emphasise enough, it’s not in exam conditions with no help whatsoever.  They obviously will use the dictionary and glossary independently to extend their vocabulary and increase their accuracy and spelling as well.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1:  Potential Barriers for Writing

Rebecca:	So here we’re going to look at some of the potential barriers for writing and although, hopefully, by Year 5 and 6, children are developing a fair amount of confidence at writing, there’s still a mismatch between the cognitive and the linguistic level for the children.  Hopefully, as well, children are becoming more confident about writing, so they’re less worried about making mistakes than they may have been in Year 3 and 4, but obviously as the level that your expecting increases, children are still going to be nervous of possible spellings, endings, word order.  Another issue for writing in year 5 and 6 can be the teacher’s confidence because if they’re nervous of the target language and they don’t have a lot of subject knowledge in it, this can lead to them feeling less confident in teaching writing, so they may, in some cases, try to do more speaking, listening activities, but it’s really important that the children do have those opportunities to write really at every opportunity and integrated with the other skills of speaking and listening in order for them to make progress across the whole of the MFL curriculum and it’s really important, even more so, I would say, as the children get into Year 5 and 6, that they have the opportunities for writing for a real purpose, real audience.  Things, for example, that you may consider there would be developing a link for the school in the country where the target language is spoken.

7.2: Teaching Ideas – Approach

Rebecca:	So here are some approaches to teaching writing and you can see that they’re very similar to the approaches that you would have to teach in English.  So, giving the children a lot of opportunities for writing, hopefully, that they’re in a rich language environment where things in the classroom are labelled, so they have the opportunity to see the vocabulary that they are going to be writing, that children have the opportunity to have a go at writing without feeling nervous about it, so lots of opportunities on white boards, for example, just to get ideas down and that they do write across the curriculum, for example, in terms of Design & Technology, they may write a book, a pop-out book for example, or they get the opportunity to write recipes.  Obviously topics that will be interesting for the children will include things such as sport as well, so writing across a whole range of topics, and ensuring that the children do have those opportunities to write about things that they’ve been doing, hobbies, their own hobbies, things that they’ve been doing at the weekend.

7.3: Teaching Ideas – Practical Tips

Bertram:	So here we’ve put together a list of practical teaching ideas, how you could try and break down those barriers and that the students have a really wide range of writing tasks and activities, so it doesn’t feel repetitive with the language that they’ve learnt.  So, I’ll just pick out a couple of examples there.  

At the top, you can see the snowball.  The snowball activity works as follows.  So you have, like, a writing frame, or three or four sentences on the board.  If they’re towards the end of Key Stage 2, in Year 6, it might just be that you tell them what to write, kind of translation style, so there could be future tense, In 20 years, I will live in, right, put a city, and I will be a friend of, I will own a, so it could be as, depending on the level of language and where you’re using it, quite a free activity, or still very structured and then after your sentence, the students scrunch up their piece of paper, throw it at a dedicated place in the classroom, not the teacher, and then pick up a new piece, write the next sentence, so they produce a paragraph, but it’s collaboratively, not on their own.  Obviously pattern poems have all – look at some examples in a bit.  You can see the diamond line, they’re ranking activities, so that could be done with sentences now at the end of Key Stage 2 instead of just words – statements that they ran from the most – the least important and they can talk about it, could lead to a speaking activity or you could give them a diamond line filled in and they say, why, that’s the most important, or I agree/disagree with it in writing.  

And then the final example I’d like to pick out is the little stick man at the bottom and you can – the character they might have created in Year 3 or Year 4 with their basic descriptions, they could now interact, be part of a story.  They could go on an adventure, travel somewhere and, again, try to link that with other curriculum areas, makes that a lot more powerful than just confining it to the foreign language lesson.

7.4: Example

Bertram:	So here is an example of what the snowball writing could be made up of.  So, you can see the different sentences but it could be past tense, it could be future tense, you could focus on the grammar, you could just give them the first word, or you could write that for another person, then he or she will do these things, or has done these things.  So loads of ways of changing that and making that suit your class.

7.5: Example

Bertram:	Here is an example from an American artist who does that for a living, you can do that with the children. So black-out poetry, you give him the text of target language, still in Key Stage 2, and even Key Stage 3, I would say, if you give them an authentic piece of newspaper article, it’s way beyond their linguistic level.  However, they can use that as a stimulus for writing in that they can look for the words that they know, so it could be on an article on a topic that you’ve studied with them, so they should be able to pick out – they know all the transferable vocab, the modal verbs and it and she and the words that come up loads, they’re simple connectives and maybe some topical vocabulary and then try and make meaning with that, so it’s a combined reading and writing task.  The output is a poem, so it is writing in that sense, but it might be quite a fun and different way of doing writing.  

7.6: Example

Bertram:	And you can see a range of pattern and shape poems with language.  Others like to focus on the cat.  As you can see, that is made up of different sentences that would normally make a paragraph, but especially when you write a description or if you’re thinking of recipes, or weather forecasts, it could be in the shape of the weather map in the shape of a dish or something and you can see the cross-curricular links that you could use in other visual stimulus as well as a written one and combine the two.

7.7: Example

Bertram:	A final example for writing is then, those wanted letters which could now be written as paragraphs rather than as maybe the bullet point on key words that you would have produced in Year 3, if you’d done that task and then again, use it as a reading stimulus or as a discussion starting point about who do you think does this, who would – you could use that kind of language instead of just find the person who has brown eyes and so on.

8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Rebecca:	So now you can see, we’ve put a list of suggested websites that will help to support writing in Key Stage 2.  You can see that we’ve suggested here, ‘tagxedo’ and ‘wordle’– with these you can create word plans and maybe that you give the children a word plan that you’ve already created and they take that and then they do the writing sentences based on the stimulus of the words that we put into that, it could be that they put sentences or poems into their own word shapes using that, so quite a lot of ways to use that to support writing in Key Stage 2.

	Other activities that we recommend are things that such as ‘Comic Life’ and ‘toondoo’ so the children create stories using cartoon strips, so they don’t feel daunted by having to do huge pages of writing, they’re able to break the writing down into smaller chunks, but building up over time to get in those complex sentences that you’re looking for by the end of Year 6.
	
9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration

Bertram:	So the one resource we’d like to demonstrate in a bit more detail is Storybirds.  It’s an online picture book creator with using professional artists.  It’s all for free.  There are add-ons that you can then pay for.  So, for example, you can create a book online, if you wanted to download and print it, you have to pay, you know, purchase the book which doesn’t cost much but there is a cost involved but you get a free teacher’s account and then you can create classes, I think, up to 30 students for free which is plenty for what you need and then you can also, once those children have written their books, they can peer assess them, which I’ll show on one of the next slides.

9.2: Demonstration

Bertram:	So once you get Storybird, you can see, you can do a search for artwork, a keyword search, or you can look by artist if you like a particular style.  So if you type in animals or something, it’ll pull all the different pictures of animals into, like, a writing dashboard as you can see on the screen and then you can drag pictures across and then type your text in the white space down at the bottom of the screen.  But there’s also lots of different layouts available.



9.3: Demonstration

Bertram:	So once the students are finished and published their book, you can embed this on a blog or a website and there’s an example of how we’ve used that in my school, but you can also use the – just stay within Storybirds and students can – there’s a class library tab that students can then peer assess to choose stars as they wish.  So after they’ve written something, it could be a really nice reading stimulus, or stimulus for further writing afterwards, in that they can write the review or express what they think about it in the target language.

9.4: END