1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	In this session we’re going to be focussing on the age-related expectations for Year 3 and 4 in grammar and we’ll be using the assessment grids to help you assess children to progress in grammar.  We’ll also be looking at some suggested pathways to enable the children to make progress across Year 3 and 4 in grammar.

Bertram:	We’re also going to look at why some children find grammar difficult, or they struggle with it and then what we can do in terms of teaching approaches or teaching ideas to overcome these problems and finally, we’ll have a look at a range of resources around grammar and we’ll showcase one resource in a bit more detail.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	We’re now going to take a more detailed look at the progression matrix.  On the left, in the white box, as you can see the statutory requirements for MFL and then we can see how it’s been broken into Year 3 and 4, that’s the children’s first and second year of language learning.  

If we start off by looking at children’s understanding at gender, you can see it’s in Year 3, you’d expect children to start to recognise it in some languages and do have a gender which is signposted by the definite/indefinite article and gradually moving on, they can see, by the end of their second year of language learning that they’re starting to use gender appropriately and they can also see out adjectives may change depending on gender and also they can influence the word order.  

Another thing that children will be doing is looking at verbs, in particular, the high frequency verbs.  Children in Year 3 will start to use verbs in the present tense on a regular basis.  So, for example, introducing themselves, saying what their name is, saying how old they are and also in terms of second person, when they’re asking a partner a question, such as, ‘how old are you’ and ‘what is your name’, they’ll become familiar with verbs in imperative – so, for example, in classroom commands which you’ll be using on a regular basis and they’ll start to be aware of negative structures in sentences and so by the end of Year 4, children will then, hopefully, have got a – develop an understanding of the third person and they’ll be able to use some of those negative structures in a simple way.  So, for example, in expressing likes and dislikes, they’ll be able to say, ‘I do not like’, for example.

3.2: Progression Matrix (continued)

Bertram:	So, if we look at the key features and patterns of the language, so especially word order, you can see that students start by developing an awareness, they can understand the question, how it’s different from the statement and in the second year of language learning, in Year 4, they’d move on to understanding how those basic sentences and structures could be extended through adjectives and also through some simple connectives, and, or, but and then they can make a sentence longer.  They might affect the word order again, depending on the target language and they will also move on from understanding a question to have a question if, for instance, the response or the structure of a response sentence and finally, in terms of grammar, seeing how, you know, spelling differences, spelling patterns in English, like, some are the same, some are different, some have been influenced the English by other languages, you know, the conventions of punctuation, it’s like the accents in many languages and then they start to be able to write words down when they’re spelled out by their teacher.

4.	Year 3 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	So here you can see, the grammar section from the assessment grids for Year 3, and children should be able to achieve all of these things by the end of Year 3, to have achieved the age-related expectations.  
4.2: Example

Rebecca: 	So here we have exemplified what that might look like by the end of Year 3.  So, by the end of the children’s first year of language learning and you can see that children have been asked here to sort out words into single, plural, masculine and feminine and to highlight the differences between them and you can see at the bottom left of the emerging, expected and exceeding expectations for pupils.

5.	Year 4 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	So we’re now looking at the section on grammar on the Year 4 assessment grid and what might look like a bit of a daunting long list is actually, when you look at it closer, you can see that a lot of it is part and parcel of the regular teaching activities and the phrases and sentences the students would produce in your lessons would tick lots of those boxes in one go and also the emphasis on recognising and starting to use, instead of being fluid and proficient at any of those, but, we would expect them to meet those bullet points for the age-related expectations in Year 4.  




5.2: Example

Bertram:	And here, we have put a task together that shows and demonstrates the expectations that we just looked at on the assessment grid.  Just also to emphasis, like, we wouldn’t expect lots of grammar assessment, lots of standard of grammar tests to be done, it’s more, you would be able to assess the grammar through their speaking, their listening and their writing easily but at some point you might have wanted to see what of the grammar they understood, give them a task like that and you can see, so, lots of colour-coding going on, finding the different parts of speech, the genders and plurals, sets of pronouns, you know, write lists of the nouns in groups and so on.  

5.3: Example

Bertram:	So, we’ve put together and revisit now the assessments that we’ve put in place for Year 3 and Year 4 for the different skills and the aim is to show you how you can assess the grammar through those regular assessments that you don’t need a standard of grammar test as I mentioned on the previous slide, so you can see here, if they can produce this in speaking accurately, then they tick a lot of the grammar, bullet points that we looked at for Year 4, in terms of verb ending, word order, questions, statements, opinions, objectives – you can assess whether they can use that correctly or not.

5.4: Example

Rebecca:	So again, another way to assess children’s understanding is their grammar by the end of Year 4, is to take, for example, one of the reading assessments that we’ve looked at previously and you can see if the children are able to read this text and then move on to the activities, which we’ll take a look at in a moment, they will demonstrate that the children can understand the use of grammar.

5.5: Example	

Rebecca:	So the activities that the children being asked to do here, link very closely to the grammar objectives and matching the adjectives and nouns and also doing the phrases using adjectives and nouns and so gain, as I said earlier, if the children can do these activities, then it’s a clear demonstration to you that they have fulfilled the grammar objectives for Year 4.

5.6: Example

Bertram:	So, to finish off the section on Assessment, you can see their writing assessment we discussed a while ago and again, you can see they produce, if you remember, we said the first two lines here, they’re produced independently from memory or from what they’ve learnt before, so you can reassess their grammatical knowledge of word order and verb endings there, an adjective ending and so on and then the next two are produced with a writing frame, but you can see where the gaps, or you could place the gaps so that you could – it makes it easy for you to assess the grammar, whether you leave a gap for an adjective and look at the ending and that it works together with a noun and so on.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 3 Term 1

Rebecca:	So now I’m going to take a look at a suggestive pathway to help children make progress across grammar in Year 3, so by the end of Term 1, children should have developed the awareness of nouns and gender.  They will also be able to recognise imperatives through the use of classroom instructions that you’d be using, hopefully on a regular basis and they’ll be noticing simple plurals as well.

6.2: Year 3 Term 2

Rebecca:	By the end of the second term, children will be using regular verbs, first and second person verbs and so, for example, saying what they’re name is in a sentence, saying how old they and asking a partner the same questions.  So they’ll start to recognise a negative sentence, and so they’ll be able to identify words that denote negative sentences in the target language and they’ll be beginning to start to use gender.  This may not be accurate at this stage, but they’ll have an understanding that it needs to be used in certain target languages and they’ll understand the words associated with gender.

6.3: Year 3 Term 3

Rebecca:	And so by the time children reach Term 3, their first year of language learning, they’ll be using first and second person verbs to ask and answer questions, they’ll be following classroom instructions.  They’ll also be using gender more accurately and they’ll be beginning to use plurals in their spoken and written work.

6.4: Year 4 Term 1

Bertram:	Moving on to the first term in Year 4 now, so you can see that they’re continuing their work in adjectives and the pronouns.  They can recognise the pattern in the regular verbs, because they’ve already produced them in Year 3, in their speaking, and also in a written text, they can identify a simple negative sentence and point that out, why that is negative.

6.5: Year 4 Term 2

Bertram:	And, again, continuing from that, they understand that the pronouns follow the gender of the noun, they can look at the word order, changes in adjectives in some languages, they understand the patterns of the verb in the first and the third person instead of having – just using the first person, especially focusing on high frequency verbs for future years and then have a range of simple negative structures and phrases.

6.6: Year 4 Term 3

Bertram:	At the end of their second year of language learning in Year 4, they are starting to use possessive pronouns correctly.  They use the connectives and can extend their sentences.  They can understand that sometimes a connector might have an impact on word order.  They understand that question parts can help form the answer and they’re using the negative structures that so far they’ve just been able to spot and identify.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Grammar

Rebecca:	So now we’re going to have a look at some of the potential barriers for teaching grammar in Key Stage 2 and some suggestions about how to overcome these barriers.  So one of the issues can be staff confidence, particularly where staff are teaching a language that they’re not very confident with themselves.  So, it can be that they might have found it quite challenging to teach the grammar in the target language.  A suggestion really is for the teachers to make sure that they overcome that fear of teaching grammar and to make sure that grammar does get integrated into all of the lessons, into speaking, listening, into writing really and that teachers are making the grammar explicit, right from Year 3 in all activities so that the grammar underpins everything that the children are doing in the language learning and, of course, the grammar does need to be something that’s purposeful, relevant and firm which we’ll move on to in a moment and activities that can make activities fun rather than sitting down and doing textbook-style exercises of going over grammar points.

7.2: Teaching Ideas

Bertram:	So we’ve put together a list of teaching and ideas all around the grammar and its starts with something like, find the word in the text, highlight that, put it on a post-it note, like, different challenges, find five adjectives, fine three negatives and so on.  That could be combined with, like, a relay in a race, so they’ve all got different text in their groups and then they – you give them the first challenge and as soon as they’ve found it, they come back to you, give them the second challenge and they run back to their group and say, okay, now we have to find five nouns and then afterwards, they have to find a negative sentence.  So, kind of, working with the text in lots of different ways, or with the grammar in lots of different ways.  Coming up with their own way, with their own song/dance rhyme, rapture under the rule and also with the exception and teach each other – there’s lots of different ways of doing it.  You could also put them in groups, give them a grammar point each, so either they group them, like, masculine/feminine groups or past/present/future groups, or other ideas and then read out a text or sentences and then if their group comes up, they have to either do a noise or do an action or something, just to kind of really force those different grammar categories.


7.3: Teaching Ideas

Rebecca:	So here we’ve put together some display ideas, because it’s really useful if you have got those grammar concepts around in the classroom the whole time to reinforce it.  So that activities that you could do with the children, for example, are doing some of these flowers, or hands, or indeed the spider, to show different verb endings and once the children have done that, then obviously, they’ve done the grammar task, but then they make a really useful display.  These activities would also easily be adaptable to looking at different things, such as pronouns etc., not just verb endings and you can with the hand there that does really enforce personal pronouns as well as the verb endings.

8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Bertram:	So here’s a selection of websites, the place where you can find a bit more ideas about grammar.  We’ll showcase the BBC website in a minute but there’s also, to point that out, for French, that French song database, so you could look for some songs about a grammar point, so it’s very useful, like a tab website with lots of songs, even though the songs themselves might be sometimes too high linguistically, but you can just focus on the grammar and just give the students a quick overview about what the whole song means without going in too much detail and also, especially for Spanish, there’s loads of grammar songs on You Tube using current Top 10 chart hits and then Spanish tutors from around the world have put their own lyrics or classes underneath and that might also be an idea, as a class, to do a bigger song that is currently in the charts and then come up with some kind of text that explains the grammar rule to go with it.

9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration

9.2: END
