1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	The aim of this session is to help you gain a lot of confidence in understanding age-related expectations for Year 3 and 4 in reading and will help you to develop an understanding of how to assess progress so that you will understand very clearly whether your children have reached the age-related expectations in Year 3 and 4 for reading and we also have some suggested pathways to help you plan progression across Year 3 and 4.

Bertram:	We’ll then look at the barriers specific to reading as a skill and why some children might find it difficult and also what we can do as teachers and different teaching ideas and techniques, how to overcome and address those barriers and we’ll finish with looking at a range of reading resources that are freely available, how to use them and we’ll showcase one resource at the end of the session.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	We’re going to take a careful look at the age-related expectations for reading in Year 3 and 4.  In the white boxes, you can see the DfE statutory requirements for reading across Key Stage 2.  We start off by looking at reading.  In Year 3, obviously, this is the children in the first year of language learning and they’re starting to read some of those familiar words and phrases that you’d be using on an everyday basis.  Moving into Year 4, they’ll be reading those slightly longer phrases that you will be using on an everyday basis, such as how are you, I’m fine, talk about family, so as well as being able to use those verbally, we’re going to be able to read those phrases and recognise them in the written form.  In terms of story, songs and poem, in their first year of language learning, children will be joining in with stories and songs.  So, for example, on the interactive white board you may have some karaoke-style words appearing and children will join in those as a class.  As they move into Year 4, they’ll be able to read possibly a short poem, short stories, those with repeating patterns and that use familiar language to the topics that you’re doing.

Bertram:	We’re now looking at the third category which is their vocabulary and enabling them to work out the meaning of new words, using a dictionary as well.  So they, obviously, in the beginning, they just use a simple word list, read those words to find out the meaning of unfamiliar words in a phrase or sentence.  So then using their glossary or a simple dictionary to find out what a new word means and also train them to be able to spot similarities between words in English and other languages and they use cognate and year cognates and then moving on to look at clues, what text type it is, what kind of sentence, which context to work out what a word means that they haven’t seen before.

4.	Year 3 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	So here you can see the section from the assessment grids for reading by the end of Year 3.  So for children to achieve the age-related expectations, they should be able to do these four things.

4.2: Exemplar Material
	
Rebecca:	So we’re now going to show you some exemplar materials of how you could assess reading by the end of children’s first year of language learning and you can see here that we’ve used the 100 Caterpillars, a book that many children will be familiar with and the reason we’ve chosen this, is because it has familiar story, a familiar language, simple structures, so the children are going to be able to follow this without too much trouble.  

We’re going to move on have a little look at some of the activities that you can do to check their understanding of the reading of this text.

4.3: Exemplar Material (continued)

Rebecca:	Now take a moment to look at this assessment activity.  If a child is working towards the age-related expectations, you would expect them to be able to match images of the word or the fruit the day that it was eaten.  Children who are working at the expected age range expectations for Year 3, will be able to complete the table.  So, for example, they will be able to put in the image of the fruit in the table on the day that it was eaten and they’ll also be able to express a preference about that fruit, saying whether they like or don’t like it.  If a child is exceeding the age-related expectations, you would have the opportunity to leave out the French translations because, obviously, this means that they have to be able to understand the French days of the week, or Spanish days of the weeks, whichever the target language, and then relate that to what has happened on those various days.

4.4: Exemplar Material (continued)

Rebecca: 	Here’s a nice example of an activity that children might be able to access by the end of Year 3.  The reason we like this and we’ve chosen this, is because it’s very clear in terms of the colours, because you have the colour coding as well as the word for the colour and also the cognates will be ones that are familiar for children and even those aren’t, they’re going to be able to use their dictionary skills here to match the item that goes with the various colours and they’ll have a bit of a feel for whether they’ve got it right or not, if the item actually would be that colour.

4.5: Exemplar Material (continued)

Rebecca:	One of the key things to help children really develop good reading skills, is to have a very rich language environment, so, as many of you probably already do make sure that everything in your school is labelled with a target language so that children are seeing it around them all the time, so they can assimilate those words, often without even realising that they’re seeing them all the time, all around them.

5.	Year 4 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	So here you can see the section on reading from the Year 4 assessment grid based on the progression matrix and the four bullet points of what they are expected to achieve by the end of the second year of language learning.

5.2: Exemplar Material

Bertram:	So here is a sample text of a reading they could access at the end of Year 4 and you can see also they’ve got a glossary that they can use if they haven’t done these topics before which would tick that box.  You can listen, they feature the text on the side and you could also ask them some general comprehension questions, what – tell me one or two things about her ideal bedroom, tell me one or two things she doesn’t like about her current bedroom, to tease out how much they’ve understood.  There’s obviously picture clues here.

5.3: Exemplar Material (continued)

Bertram:	Here’s an example, another reading example for Year 4.  It’s that repeated pattern that really lends itself to reading same language, that repetition of their relatively small amount of language in different ways.  A great springboard for a writing task afterwards, so they can write their own poem, they can change the means of transport, they can change where they go to and then once they’ve created their own poem, again, it would go back to reading, so then you could put up in the classroom and the library and read each other’s poems and ask questions about them.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 3 Term 1

Rebecca:	So here you can see suggested pathway for helping children to reach the age-related expectations by the end of Year 3.  We’ve broken it down into three terms, as a guideline to how you can get those children to the right level by the end of Year 3.  So you can see here, that by the end of Term 1, you would hope, in terms of reading, that children would be able to read simple text with using the very basic vocabulary that you started.  For example, reading about a child who describes the name and their age and this will be a springboard so that speaking, listening activity will enable them to read, not just read to themselves but read it aloud.  They’ll also respond to text that they’ve been reading, so matching greetings and things like that, matching simple information and at this point, you’re hoping for them to broaden their vocabulary.  Actually, often start to have a wider vocabulary than you think because of the exposure to the songs and the games and the activities you’ll have been doing, but certainly, by the end of Term 1, you would hope that the majority of children will be able to read about seven familiar words and phrases.

6.2: Year 3 Term 2

Rebecca:	So by the end of Term 2, in the children’s first year of language learning, they should be able to read about opinions and respond to that by explaining, for example, what somebody liked, what they don’t like.  They’ll also start to use word lists to help them identify key words in text that they’re looking at.  They’ll be using very familiar-type books with the repeating language and hopefully by the end of Term 2, they will be able to read and understand about 10 to 14 familiar words.

6.3: Year 3 Term 3

Rebecca:	So, by the end of the third term in children’s first year of language learning, they should be able to read the conversations that they’ve actually been having orally but see that in the written form, they’ll be able to fill in gaps appropriately and answer true/false statements.  Children will also be having a greater awareness that some spelling links aren’t always the same in different languages and they will take that into consideration.  So, we’re not saying that the pronunciation will be accurate, but they will understand that certain words and sounds are pronounced differently.  They will gradually increase in their vocabulary and certainly a lot of children will be around 10-20 familiar words and phrases.

6.4: Year 4 Term 1

Bertram:	At the start of Year 4 then, the second year of language learning, you can see how it slowly moves away, so, so far it’s more or less mirrored the listening and speaking element.  So we’re still reading those long conversation exchanges, personal information, the stories and so on, but now we’re moving to information about other people, the third person.  So, might move away from the conversation they’ve been having so far, so they’re accessing different material in written form and they’ll be able to answer the multiple choice questions and also begin to break down the more complex or compound words or words made up of paths that they do understand, using their glossary, their previous knowledge and extending the vocabulary to about 20/25 familiar words.  Again, that’s just a guideline.

6.5: Year 4 Term 2

Bertram:	You can see now by the end of Term 2 in their second year of language learning, the recipes is a different type of text type.  We are including opinions, so they can access those in longer conversations in the written text.  They can record and respond to those opinions.  Also, with the vocabulary, they develop their own glossary and they’re beginning to see the words that they know, there’s 25/30 familiar words across different topics of context.  There’s a special focus on the high frequency verbs and words.


6.6: Year 4 Term 3

Bertram:	So, if you focus in the last term of their second year of language learning, is on the slighter longer text and also introducing more unfamiliar language into their reading resources.  Again, they respond to it, they continue to develop their own glossary and we’ve reached about 30 or more familiar words and phrases and can use them in different contexts which goes beyond the reading.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Reading

Rebecca:	So here are some of the potential barriers that you might find when teaching reading.  Children can be daunted when they first look at a text with lots of foreign language, the target language on the page and it looks completely unfamiliar to them.  So this is why it’s really important to make sure that you choose texts that are appropriate and engaging and this, again, can be a challenge in itself, because often the language will be a lot younger than the children at a cognitive level of development.  Another issue to ensure that the reading techniques are taught so that children can have progression in reading, but obviously that goes along side by side with teaching in their ordinary English lessons.  So same reading techniques apply to reading in the target language.  And also, reading is something that we do need to ensure that we’ve put into lessons so that we move away from the idea that primary language is simply speaking and listening, that children do get those opportunities for regular reading.

7.2: Teaching Ideas 1

Bertram:	So here is a selection of teaching ideas and approaches to break down those barriers that children might have in terms of reading.  So, it’s obviously the reading skills, reading lots of different set ups on their own with a partner in groups, with the whole class.  People really focused learning activities that they can access and succeed in, instead of quite broad comprehension questions that they might not be able to access.  A widest possible range of reading materials – I can’t emphasise enough, the similarities to English and how to teach reading for pleasure and enjoying reading in English.  So it’s the same techniques and language-rich classroom and obviously give them the skills to be able to work out words with a list of glossary or a dictionary, so they get more independent.



7.3: Teaching Ideas 2

Bertram:	And here are some more hands-on teaching activities to do with reading. So obviously annotations, post-it notes, rebuild the text, give them text, sentences in chunks, put them in the right order, sorting activities.  A favourite of mine is the running dictation, where you have several teams in the class, they all have a dedicated text and then in their teams, they have one person who runs to the text at the back and tells the rest of the group what’s on that in the text and they have to write it down and the first team to write the whole text down on their group table, wins and you can have then all sorts of different levels of difficulty and, obviously, again, emphasising that reading is a great springboard for writing and the other skills, so reading out loud leads nicely to then the role play or asking questions in the target language.

8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Rebecca:	So you can see here a selection of resources that we can recommend to support reading.  The Mary Glasgow publications are really good because they have activities and exercises that go with them.  This is a resource that we have to pay for, however, you may club together with a cluster of schools or you may use some of the free downloadable things from the internet.  Another company that we really like is the European School Books.  They have a really, really wide range of reading books: very colourful, very high quality and across a range of languages and I think that although these books are a little bit expensive, it’s a really good investment in terms of having good quality reading material available for the children.

	Other things that we recommend are always having the authentic resources.  An example here on instant display that you can print things off, but ideally you get things, like, menus from restaurants in the country where the target language is spoken, posters, advertisements, these kind of things and another website that we like, an organisation, Little Red Language is they have a wide range of animated stories so you’ll be able to use those on contracted white boards or tablets for children to read.

9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration

9.2: END
