1.	Introduction

2.	Session Objectives

2.1: Session Objectives

Rebecca:	In this session, we’re going to be taking a close look at the age-related expectations for year 3 and 4 in writing and to be able to help you assess progress in writing, we’re going to be looking at the assessment grids that you’ll be able to use to support you with this.  We’re also going to be looking at some pathways for progression which will show you how children can make the required progress across their first and second year of language learning.

Bertram:	We’ll then look at what could stop children gaining confidence in writing and what teaching strategies and teaching activities we can use to overcome those barriers and we’ll finally signpost you to a range of resources and we’ll showcase one resource in a bit more detail.

3.	Age Related Expectations

3.1: Progression Matrix

Rebecca:	Here, we’re going to take a look at the progression matrix, looking in a lot more detail at progression across Year 3 and 4 in writing and you’ll see that by the end of the children’s first year of language learning, they should be able to copy a lot of familiar words but also they’ll be able to write between five to ten words from memory and spelling mostly accurate.  It’s more important that they’re actually having a go at those writing opportunities and we would recommend that right from the outset, children do get the opportunity to start building up their own word banks, either a word book or a section at the back of the writing book that they’re using and they may want to, for example, use it to, kind of, colour-coding system for gender, so from the outset, they’re getting into really good habits and they’ll be able to use that throughout their Key Stage 2 language learning and writing.

Bertram:	And then, by the end of their second year of language learning, they’ll still rely heavily on their memory to produce language in writing, but they will be able to then adapt short phrases using familiar words, a wider range of actual sentences and word level and complete texts with words they’ve learnt before and a short description with, again, like a writing frame style support so overall, they make progress towards what’s on the left in white, in the white column, the guidance that’s from the DfE, what they should have achieved by the end of Key Stage 2.

4.	Year 3 – Assessment

4.1: Assessment Grid

Rebecca:	Now you can see a section from the assessment grid which looks in detail at writing by the end of Year 3.  If the children can achieve these targets, then we would say that they are hopefully achieving the age-related expectations. 

4.2: Examples

Rebecca: 	So here you can see an example of what writing might look like by the end of Year 3, and hopefully this will give you some reassurance that children as expected, to write a lot of written work by the end of Year 3.  

Here, children have written parts of the body and their spelling is mostly accurate.  You can see they’ve had a good go at the spelling of these words.  What you can see in the red boxes are links to the grammar – an exercise like this would be useful because you’ll be able to assess writing but you’d also be able to link that to assessing grammar as well by the end of Year 3.

5.	Year 4 – Assessment

5.1: Assessment Grid

Bertram:	So here you can see the selection of writing, the age-related expectations that, by the end of their second year of language learning, we’d expect them to hopefully meet those five bullet points.

5.2: Example

Bertram:	So we’ve put together an example of what writing could look like at the end of Year 4, their second year of language learning and it comes in two parts.  So the first is a couple of sentences or a few sentences written from memory and you can see that down here, so the students produce the first bit from memory or independently and then they can extend their writing by using the gap fill text above and fill in the gaps with personal information so they produce what looks like quite a long paragraph but which overall is written with some support and then demonstrates what they’ve achieved in the two years of language learning.

6.	Suggested Pathway

6.1: Year 3

Rebecca:	Here you can see a suggested pathway that will help children reach the age-related expectations by the end of year 3 and you can see that children are expected to write phrases from memory.  So in order for them to reach this goal by the end of Year 3, children need to start off by – in term one – copying familiar words enabling greeting words, such as hello, goodbye, moving on to the phrases that they’ll be using in all that they’re doing, such as: “my name is” and “how are you”.  Eventually, by the end of the year, moving on to labelling activities or, indeed, writing some words from memory with accurate spelling.  They’re also beginning to develop the awareness of punctuation and accents, depending on the target language that they’re using and beginning to understand some specific spelling rules – only just beginning though.

6.2: Year 4

Bertram:	So this continues in Year 4.  We’ve put this suggested pathway together where you can see that the children would start in their journey towards writing phrases from memory by adapting short phrases, simple opinions, then writing a sentence, again, based on the speaking and listening they’ve done in the previous year to them, by the end of their second year of language learning in Year 4 to write three to five simple sentences on familiar topics and work with a poem, poster – it could be a range of different texts.  Their accuracy overall increases, so they can adapt phrases to create the new sentences.  They use their grammatical knowledge of word classes and their personal word bank that they’ve put together and then they keep working at it over the course of their language learning, so that their spelling and punctuation of the words and phrases they’ve learned is correct by the end of their second year of language learning.

7.	Barriers and Solutions

7.1: Potential Barriers for Writing

Rebecca:	So now I’m going to look at some of the potential barriers for writing.  It’s clear that in the early days of writing, there’s going to be a mismatch of the cognitive and linguistic learning with children wanting to write more than they have the language ability to do so.  They also can be nervous of making mistakes in their writing because they can be faced with unfamiliar spelling patterns and unsure about the word order, depending on the target language.  This may be compounded by the teacher having a lack of confidence in writing, so the teacher may be more confident with speaking and listening and less confident with the writing activities and also the teacher may be finding it difficult how to integrate the writing with the other skills in order for the children to make progress.  Another problem can be that the children start off with writing those words, but then they do need the opportunity to move from single words into phrases, into sentences and longer pieces of writing, and also finding opportunities for children to write for a real purpose or audience.

7.2: Teaching Ideas – Approach

Rebecca:	So we’re going to look at some of the approaches to writing that you can take that will help the children make that progress in writing in Year 3 and 4.  It’s really important that you do integrate the writing activities from the outset.  So, often, speaking and listening take a lot of priority in Year 3 and 4, but it is important, as often as possible, the children have those opportunities for writing and writing for a purpose, so you may make links, cross-curriculum links, such as in Design & Technology and making books, for example, so the children have opportunities to write simple books with repeating patterns using recipes.  It’s also important that you find topics of interest to the children, so that when they’re writing, they’re able to write about things that engage them and that you do use appropriate levels of support and frameworks so children can feel as if they’re making progress in their writing quite early on.

7.3: Teaching Ideas – Practical Tips

Bertram:	Right, so here is some teaching activities now to try and break down those barriers and try and have a wide range of activities to vary their writing experience.  So, like, when I do the shared writing at the top, the snowballs, so students, you just give them a smallish piece of paper each and they start writing one sentence.  It could be following a writing frame from the board, so they have to write one sentence about, in the future, you will live in Canada and just put the country, for example, and they scrunch it up and throw I to the front of the class and then pick a snowball and then they write the second sentence, in the future, you will do this, you will be a friend of and they just put the name of the celebrity.  So it can be just something where they just fill in one word and they could choose those words from a selection of words which is also on the board.  It can be very, very structured and supported but they produce a paragraph, together, afterwards and they pick a snowball and then can keep that. 

	Other ideas are obviously ranking, any of those high level thinking skills, activities with words, where there’s more about thinking than about the producing lots of words and also ideas for a creative writing workshops, you might have come across – creating a character, so you can draw a stick man and ask the class, okay, is this a man or a woman, what’s his name, how old is he and quite basically, the same questions that they’ve learned in their first year of language learning, but produce a character and then the class – everybody can produce their own character and over time, those characters could take on hobbies, they could go through all the things you go through topic-wise.  Possibly interact, they could have a physical description, character description.  There’s a lot of mileage in those kind of ideas that can accompany the children through their progress in writing.

7.4: Example

Bertram:	So here is an example of the snowball activity that could be on the board and they just write the first sentence, scrunch it up, write the second sentence and you can see the brackets in English, you’ve got the job, city celebrity, luxury article, that could be some dictionary work in Year 4 possibly, or from a glossary or a selection of words you give them.  Or they could brainstorm different vocabulary areas.  Before they start the activities, there are loads of different ways of accessing this and you can see how that’s integrated, you know, as a reading activity as well, and that’s also the idea that cognitive and linguistic level is more closely aligned than in maybe a labelling activity or some other type of writing.

7.5: Example

Bertram:	Again, a different way of writing, so you can – the way this works is, it’s taken from an American artist and you can just give students, like, a piece of target language text that can be from a newspaper, you can print that out and students look for the words the know in that big piece of text, so it’s kind of a tiring reading task as well, but they produce a poem out of it, so you can see the words that are left, that are not blacked out, that you create meaning out of those words.  So, a very minimal amount of language used to create – just like poetry, a lot of different meanings from it.

7.6: Example

Bertram:	Particularly good at the earliest stages of language learning where the students have more, like, a list of words than sentences, it’s pattern or shape poems and you can see examples, so you look at the different words and see how meaning is created by arranging the words in a certain way, or by leaving out words or putting in spaces, you can see in the bottom left corner, the wind, how that blows around and then you can see the word chaos and order and how that’s played with.  He might have spotted the worm in the apple and obviously colour, pattern poems is a great way of giving them a wide range of different writing tasks.

7.7: Example

Bertram:	On this slide, you can see the different ways of then creating a character, so you can start, if you think at the beginning of the language learning, they know how to say, my name is, I live in, basic family, facts about themselves and this could then culminate in an activity where they write like, I wanted – it could be a teacher, it could be themselves, it could be their friends, it could be for the character they’ve created.  If you think back to that stick man activity, it could be then a class display with all the different posters up in the class and then that could lead to a good reading activity to find the person who, and so on.

8.	Resources

8.1: Suggested Resources

Rebecca:	We’ve put together a list of recommended websites that you can use to help you support writing.  You can see the first one, ‘tagxedo’ and ‘wordle’, both give the children the opportunity to create word plans and other shapes with very limited language, but they can get very nice results from that, and obviously these things would make nice displays in the classroom which really enforce the writing that you’ve been doing in the target language.  Other things that support writing, especially in the early years of writing, are things such as ‘toondoo’ and ‘Comic Life’ where children can do cartoon strips and, again, using quite a limited amount of language, but to get quite good results in terms of creating short stories.  Another one we’re going to look at in a bit more detail like this, is ‘StoryBird’.
	
9.	Have a Go!

9.1: Demonstration

Bertram:	The resource we’re looking at in a bit more detail today is StoryBird.com, it’s free.  There is also a paid for version but it’s really enough to get the free version as a teacher and you can get up to 30 student accounts and you can create online picture books, which you can also download but that’s, then, you have to pay for them if you want, you know, to download them, to print them, but you can embed them on websites and blogs and share it that way.

9.2: Demonstration

Bertram:	Now you can see here, once you log on, you can do a search for art on a theme, or you can just look by artist if you like a certain style and then it collects – it puts all those pictures around a theme or an artist in your – you can see your dashboards, so you’ve got in the middle, where you can drag pictures across and in the white space underneath the big picture, you can then write your story.

9.3: Demonstration

Bertram:	And here is an example of what it looks like and then it embeds your results on a blog or a web page, or you can just look at them.  There’s a class library function, so the students can, once they’ve logged into StoryBird, they can look at each other’s work, just on the StoryBird website as well and choose stars and there is feedback, leave comments and so on.

9.4: END









