 ABOUT JOURNEY LATIN AMERICAYOUR LATIN AMERICA TRAVEL EXPERTSOPHIE BARBERSophie first visited Latin America on a year abroad in Santiago as part of her university degree, where she studied Spanish at a local university and spent the holidays backpacking around as much of South America as possible. After completingher degree in Spanish and French in the UK, she returned to Central America and travelled from Mexico to Panama overland. Her love of travel then took her to China where she taught English for a year before returning to the UK to join our holiday sales team. Her flair for translating clients' individual preferences into exceptional, personalised travel experiences quickly came to the fore. One of our most popular, well-travelled and articulate consultants, she is now a Team Leader in the sales department. For Sophie, it is the mixture of wildlife (she has visited the Galapagos Islands three times!) and nature combined with local culture and heritage that continues to draw her back to Latin America. HERE TO HELPIf there is anything you wish to discuss please feel free to call or email me. Tel: 020 8600 1884Email: sophie.barber@journeylatinamerica.co.ukVIEW MY FULL PROFILE INTRODUCTION TO MEXICOMexico is a big country with a variety of landscapes, climates and traditions to match. The deserts, mountains and jungles have been the stage for a turbulent history. Flick your way through the pages of its story on the ground and you find the vestiges of the Aztec and Mayan empires, with magnificent ruined pyramids and temples on well-ordered archaeological sites, and graceful colonial towns and haciendas, while a timeless indigenous life continues in the villages and markets.The countryside is stunning too: there's a spine of rippling barren mountains, studded with armies of cacti, while much of the coastline is enveloped in dripping rainforest. All this is fringed by sugary beaches and aquamarine seas.But Mexico is a modern country with a robustemerging economy. Its huge capital is one of the world's greatest cities, and there's an efficient road and air network linking Mexico's major attractions.______________________________________________________________________WHEN TO GOIt's a year-round destination. Over half the country enjoys temperate highland weather, while the coasts are mostly sunny, hot and relatively humid. The northwest has an arid desert climate. Elsewhere most rain falls from Jun to Sep though precipitation can be expected up to Nov. Hurricanes are possible around the Gulf of Mexico and Yucatán Peninsula Jul -Nov.LANGUAGESpanish and indigenous languages.CURRENCYMexican peso. Notes can be withdrawn from the many ATMs using a UK credit or debit card. You may have to ask your bank to authorise withdrawals before you leave leave UK, and amounts are limited to about £100.TIME DIFFERENCEGMT -6 hrs and -7 hrs in Southern Baja California and the Copper Canyon.  KEY EVENTSIndependence Day: 16 Sep Celebrations throughout the country.Día de los Muertos (Day of the Dead): 1-2 Nov. Celebrated throughout the country.  INTRODUCTION TO CUBACuba is the largest of all the Caribbean islands and one of the most fascinating. It has a unique and eventful history, mirrored in the outpourings of its rich culture of music, dance, and socio-political innovation.The island also has stunning landscapes, from the unique limestone plateau scenery west of Havana through tropical plantations to the rugged mountains and forests of the Sierra Maestra in the east. Cuba is liberally dotted withpristine sandy beaches and restored colonial towns. While the façades of the pre-revolutionary period remain, they sit alongside increasingly efficient new hotels, resorts, roads and other tourist facilities.______________________________________________________________________WHEN TO GOThe high season for visitors is Dec -Apr when the weather is usually sunny, mostly dry and not too humid, though there can be cool days. Hurricane and tropical storms are possible Aug -Nov.LANGUAGESpanish.CURRENCYYou can purchase Cuban Convertible Pesos at the airport or in banks or cadecas (money exchanges) in principal towns. US dollars are not accepted so you need to take cash in  sterling. Euros are also accepted but the rate may not be as favourable. There are some ATM machines which supposedly accept debit cards but they are not always reliable. You can also get cash with a credit or debit card (not issued by a US bank). You can change surplus money back to convertible currencies at the airport at the endof your trip. NB: The more valuable convertible peso (CUC) has been reserved for use in the tourism sector and foreign trade. In October 2013, as part of a package of economic reforms its value will be gradually unified with the lower-value CUP, ending a system resented by ordinary Cubans.TIME DIFFERENCEGMT -5 hrs.KEY EVENTSCarnival:  There are carnivals throughout the country on different dates. Havana's carnival moves around date-wise year upon year, but is always accompanied by parades, music, drumming and dancing. Santiago's carnival in July is probably the biggest and the best.International Jazz Festival: Havana, Dec. Workshops and concerts. One of the world's best.  SUMMARY ITINERARYStart date:  FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 2018 Names of travellers: Booking reference: MR JOHN CABLE, MRS LESLEY CABLE, MISS SOPHIE CABLE, MISS EMILY CABLE,  358130 FRI 23 NOV Flight from London Heathrow to Mexico City SAT 24 NOV Flight from Mexico City to OaxacaPrivate transfer to your hotelHotel Casa Conzatti (2 night stay with check into room on arrival) -mid-range 2 x standard twin room -breakfast includedMonte Alban and Hierve el Agua-Half-day private excursion SUN 25 NOV Oaxacan street food and Mezcal tasting -Half-day private excursion MON 26 NOV Private transfer to the airportFlight from Oaxaca to Mexico CityFlight from Mexico City to MeridaPrivate transfer to your hotelHotel Boutique Casa Lucia (2 night stay) -mid-range 2 x standard twin room-breakfast included TUE 27 NOV Merida City tour -Half-day private excursion WED 28 NOV Private transfer to Chichen ItzaChichen Itza ruins -Half-day private excursion -lunch includedMayaland and Bungalows (2 night stay) -mid-range 2 x superior twin room -breakfast included THU 29 NOV Ek-Balam & Valladolid with Ik Kil & Samula Cenotes -private excursion FRI 30 NOV Private transfer to Cancun airportFlight from Cancun to HavanaCuban Tourist Card includedPrivate transfer to your hotelHotel Inglaterra (3 night stay) -mid-range 2 x standard twin room-breakfast included SAT 01 DEC Walking tour of Old Havana -Half-day private excursionRum museum visit -Shared SUN 02 DEC Day at leisure MON 03 DEC Private transfer to TrinidadTrinidad Homestay (2 night stay) -simple 2 x twin room-breakfast included4 x dinner (first night only)Trinidad colonial city walking tour -Half-day private excursion -lunch included TUE 04 DEC Day at leisure WED 05 DEC Private transfer to HavanaFlight from Havana to Mexico CityPrivate transfer to your hotelHistorico Central (3 night stay) -mid-range 2 x standard twin room-breakfast included THU 06 DEC Teotihuacan pyramids and Guadalupe Shrine -Full-day shared excursion FRI 07 DEC Puebla, Tonantzintla and Cholula -Full-day private excursion SAT 08 DEC Day at leisure –latecheck out at hotel confirmed Private transfer to the airportFlight from Mexico City to London Heathrow QUOTATIONQuotation for: No of travellers: MR JOHN CABLE 4 Start date: Booking reference: FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 2018 358130 PRICE FOR ALL TRAVELLERS   WHAT’SINCLUDED Flights (taxes included) £4,284.00   .... All accommodation and transport as specifiedExcursions as per itineraryEntrance fees detailed on the itineraryMeals where specified Charitable donation to projectsin Latin America (optional) * £60.00  Ground arrangements £9,516.00     TOTAL FOR ALL TRAVELLERS £13,860.00   Deposit required to confirm the itinerary £2,700.00  PAYABLE LOCALLY Final payment due date 24 September 2018  Tips, local airport departure taxes and items of a personal nature. * See “Our Charities” for more information    HOW TO BOOKTo proceed with your booking, please contact us to pay yourdeposit. We will then confirm allservices as soon as possible.Please also complete the booking form, ensuring all traveller names match yourpassportsand email us scanned copies of your passports.PAYMENT TERMSThe preferred and most secure payment method is bank transfer. Most bank transfers are received within 1-2 hours and will be credited to your booking immediately upon receipt. Our bank details are stated below. Please remember to quote your booking reference, 358130, as payment reference. We also accept payment by cheques and credit or debit cards. Cheques should be made payable to Journey Latin America Ltd and sent to 401 King Street, London W6 9NJ. OUR BANK DETAILS ARE:Bank: Lloyds Bank PlcIBAN:GB18 LOYD 3092 0100 4687 59Account name:Journey Latin America Ltd SWIFT/BIC:LOYDGB21336Sort code:30-92-01Quote payment ref:358130Account no: 00468759 HERE TO HELPIf there is anything you wish to discuss please feel free to call or email me. Tel: 020 8600 1884Email: sophie.barber@journeylatinamerica.co.ukDETAILEDITINERARY Start date:  FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBER 2018 Names of travellers: Booking reference: MR JOHN CABLE, MRS LESLEY CABLE, MISS SOPHIE CABLE, MISS EMILY CABLE,  358130 FRIDAY 23 NOVEMBERFlight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM0008 London Heathrow Mexico City 22:30 04:20 next day Non-stop Economy AM=Aeromexico SATURDAY 24 NOVEMBERFlight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM2046 Mexico City Oaxaca 06:05 07:20 Non-stop Economy AM=AeromexicoOaxaca is a charming city with a long and eventful history. Separated from Mexico City to the north by rugged mountains and dotted with small weaving and craft villages, the isolated region has ploughed its own furrow, forging its own distinctive identity.Known as Mexico's artistic centre, Oaxaca embodies both indigenous and colonial features, the markets, artisan workshops, rituals and multiple fiestas reflecting the native culture while the baroque architecture, plazas and museums bear witness to the Spanish influence. The Zapotec and Mixtec people's ancient sites at Monte Albán, Yagul and Mitla are as impressive as the Mayan ruins in the south and east.Private transfer to your hotelHotel Casa Conzatti (mid-range, 2night staywith check into room on arrival)2 x standard twin room breakfast included This agreeable little hotel (45 rooms) occupies a former residence the building of which inspired by the prevailing colonial style in Oaxaca. It is in a quiet corner of what can be a rumbustious city, next to a little park, less than a kilometre from the main square and a few blocks from the main commercial district. There are 3 adjoining blocks housing the guest rooms and restaurant, sparkly clean with whitewashed walls, tiled flooring and an airy feel. Décor in the rooms themselves  is hardly cutting edge, colours are bright in a Mexican way, but it isn't too fussy. There are some nice extra facilities not always present in medium class hotels, such as a tea and coffee maker in the rooms, free Wifi in the restaurant, TV, safe, ironing kit and hair dryer.  Monte Alban ruinsand Hierve el Agua Half-day private excursion    It is a short 9km drive to the ancient ruins of Monte Albán. The city was the capital of the Zapotec people, flourishing until its demise around 950AD. Lying on a hill, the views from the temples and pyramids of the surrounding area are superb. At its height, thecity was a highly sophisticated society of over 25,000 inhabitants.After continue to Hierve el Agua about 30km away. Here mineral springs run into icy-cold clifftop bathing pools with expansive panoramas. The surrounding cliffs are encrusted with petrified minerals, giving them the appearance of huge frozen waterfalls. Bring your swimsuit as there may be chance to swim, altogether it is one of the more unusual bathing experiences! Hotel Casa Conzatti SUNDAY 25 NOVEMBEROaxacan street food and Mezcal tasting Half-day private excursion    You'll be collected from your hotel at 09h00 for a comprehensive visit to Benito Juárez market and its environs: this is the focus of street food in the city.  You'll be taken to various parts of the city for different courses in what will be an exotic, locally inspired meal.  If you dare, you'll have the opportunity to taste well known the pre-Hispanic delicacy grasshoppers (chapulines), and the less controversial quesillo cheese; as well as an empanada, washed down with fruity water.  Afterwards, walk to the 20th November market to continue sampling the delicious gastronomy of Oaxaca, tasting grilled dry meat (tasajo) with guacamole and baby onions. For dessert choose a traditional sweet, an Oaxaca sherbet or a classic nicuatole. Last but not least, stroll to a Mezcalería to savour the different types of agave.Hotel Casa Conzatti MONDAY 26 NOVEMBERBox breakfast provided by hotelPrivate transfer to the airportFlight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM2047 Oaxaca Mexico City 08:10 09:25 Non-stop Economy AM=AeromexicoFlight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM0515 Mexico City Merida 11:35 13:28 Non-stop Economy AM=AeromexicoMérida was founded by the Mayan Indians but in 1542 it was conquered by the Spanish conquistadores and became immensely wealthy, described as 'the Paris of the New World'. Its income came from the production of sisal, cactus fibres that are used to make rope, and it was culturally and geographically isolated from the rest of the country until transport infrastructure reached it in the 1950s. Today, Mérida retains a lovely colonial centre, with a mix of opulent and crumbly buildings but it is a modern, bustling, thriving city, with lots of local character, some excellent places to eat and good shops and markets. The inhabitants, descendants of theMayans and the colonists, love a good fiesta, and you may well find one going on, with live music and street stalls, while you are there. Stroll around the sunny streets, shop for local lace or one of the region's famous hammocks.Private transfer to your hotelHotel Boutique Casa Lucia (mid-range, 2 night stay)2 x standard twin room breakfast included This small hotel comprises two neighbouring 19th century houses, influenced by later styles -particularly, French art deco. It is located in the heart of the historical centre, three blocks from the main square and cathedral. The interior is adorned with original oilpaintings, antique furniture, chandeliers and frescoes. The rooms have marble/wooden floors and bathrooms with porcelain tubs. There is also an elegant, small restaurant in the front of the plaza (sometimes live music) , a boutique, and a small pool in the pretty garden. There is free WIFI. TUESDAY 27 NOVEMBERMerida City tour Half-day private excursion    This two to three-hour excursion takes in the highlights of Mérida, the bustling, colonial capital city of Yucatán State. Many of these are within the historical area around the Plaza Mayor such as its Baroque cathedral on the east side of the square and the oldest in Latin America, and the Municipal and Government Palaces. Other attractions include the attractive Peon Conteras theatre, Hidalgo Park with its open-air cafes, and the university. Centenario Park, a few blocks away, has a small zoo, and further north, the beautiful Palacio Cantón houses the Museum of Anthropology and History with many Mayan artefacts on show. Hotel Boutique Casa Lucia WEDNESDAY 28 NOVEMBERPrivate transfer to Chichen Itza-lunch includedIt is a 2.-hour drive tothe famous Mayan pyramids of Chichén Itzá, arriving around 11am. Transport is by private air-conditioned car. An exclusive English-speaking guide and a buffet lunch is included.Chichén Itzá is the best-known and best-restored of the Yucatán's vast array of Mayan archaeological sites. It overwhelms with the vast scale of its temples and pyramids, and the intricate carvings, the evocative ball courts and 'time temples' are indicative of the creative fusion of Mayan and Toltec cultures. You'll come across multiple imagesof the Mayan rain god and Quetzalcóatl, the plumed serpent, and, hidden in the woodland, the bright waters of the steeple-sided cenotes, or limestone sink-holes.On your second day, you have the change to visit the ruins independently but you'll need pay again to get in. However, if you go early enough, you'll have a chance to see this most impressive and important of ruins before the crowds arrive, and when the light is best. Chichen Itza ruins Half-day private excursion   lunch included The impressive site is over 1500 years old, and divided into three sections: the castle and central pyramid of nine stepped levels, four decorated with designs of snakes and jaguars; the Temple of the Warriors; observatory; ball court; the impressive Sacred Cenote, a 35m deep natural well used in Mayan religious ceremonies and sacrifices; and the North Group of earlier predominantly Toltec buildings.Mayaland and Bungalows (mid-range, 2 night stay)2 x superior twin room breakfast included The Mayaland is a well-regarded resort just a few minutes' walk from the ruins at Chichén Itzá. Its location is probably the main reason for its popularity but it is also a pleasant, well-managed place to stay, set in landscaped, forest-green tropical gardens dotted with small Mayan structures and run through with streams. There are 55 rooms and five spacious suites in the elegant, antique-filled main building, cool and bright with air-con, cable TV and hand-made ceramic tiles. Even more exquisite are several attractively situated individual cottages, shaded by flowering trees and each with private terrace. It's a proper self-contained resort, with four restaurants (many of the ingredients are grown on the premises), two bars, three outdoor swimming pools, tennis courts andbird-watching trails. THURSDAY 29 NOVEMBEREk-Balam & Valladolid with Ik Kil & Samula Cenotes  Full-day private excursion    An early morning start to visit the Sacred Cenote Ikkil -a natural well used for human sacrifice, and many other beautiful temples. Continue to the archaeological site of Ek Balam:the word means "bright star jaguar" or "black jaguar" in Mayan language. The main temple is impressive, both in size and architecture, but the most striking temple has a huge monster mouth. To the Mayas this represented the portal to the underworld. The sculpted works of the Maya ruins at Ek Balam are extremely well preserved. Somefigures are winged, some in the meditative lotus position, one sits headless above the centre of themonster mouth. There's also a beautiful arch connecting to a 'sacbe' (ancient road).On the way back you will visit Valladolid. There are seven colonial churches and the city is nicknamed the Sultan of the Eastbecause of its colonial splendour. You head southwest from the main plaza to arrive at the 16th century Covent of San Bernardino de Siena, one of the most beautiful buildings in Valladolid. There are some original frescos inside the church and, outside, orchards and gardens. Finish the day with a visit to the Samula Cenote, 3km from Valladolid.Mayaland and Bungalows FRIDAY 30 NOVEMBERPrivate transfer to Cancun airport-The drive takes about 3. hours. Flight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM0449 Cancun Havana 13:54 15:12 Non-stop Economy AM=AeromexicoCuban Tourist Card -All UK passport holders travelling to Cuba require a Tourist Card, sometimes called a Tourist Visa, to enter the country, along with your passport.  Journey Latin America will supply and complete your Tourist Card for you using the information you've supplied on the booking form.  If you are not a UK passportholder please check your individual visa requirements before travelling to Cuba.Every country in Latin America has its unique characteristics, both physical and cultural; they share a Latin cultural heritage but each has a personality all of its own. Cuba is an island with a fascinating social and political past. Whilst it boasts some of the Caribbean's best beaches, Havana Club rum and is alive with music and dance it's easy to forget that you are still in a communist stronghold.  Things do take a little longer, service is normally a bit slower and last minute local changes are common place. However, if you go with an open mind and willingness to accommodate minor inconveniences, you should have a wonderful time. Our staff know the country well; pleasedo not hesitate to consult them while you are planning your journey.Havana -the largest city in the Caribbean -was founded in 1519 at the mouth of a deep bay. Its position gave it considerable strategic and commercial importance, and the extensive fortresses around the harbour were built for its protection. Before the Revolution, Havana was a wealthy and sumptuous city, notable for its grand colonial buildings. Little has changed architecturally since that time but the city has become rundown and theimpressive colonial waterfront buildings have begun to erode from the salt. Restoration, like most things in Cuba, is on the slow side.Private transfer to your hotelHotel Inglaterra (mid-range, 3 night stay)2 x standard twin room breakfast included The Hotel Inglaterra is one if Havana's grand old institutions. Occupying an imposing site right on the central square, the opulent colonial building blends a mélange of styles which narrate the country's history: classic, Spanish colonial, even Moorish, with graceful arches, high ceilings and furnishings recalling the unashamed opulence of bygone times. Its restaurant and rooftop terrace are great spots to while away some people-watching time or to capture city views and rays of the setting sun. The adjoining café hosts live music most evenings.All that said, this is Cuba: the era of extravagance has passed, and as a hotel, it has faced harsh economic realities. Classically decorated guest rooms are quite small and, as is the case with many colonial conversions, many do not have an outside window. Renovations are slowly taking place, but  you might have to be resigned to a faltering electricity or hot water system.  But you are following in illustrious footsteps here -Cuban independence here JoséMartí, Ernest Hemingway and Anna Pavlova have passed through its lofty doors. Staying here gives you a real flavour of Havana's history, with all its highs and lows.  SATURDAY 01 DECEMBERWalking tour of Old Havana Half-day private excursion    Amble through the cobbled streets of Old Havana, a UNESCO World Heritage Site stuffed with colonial and baroque buildings. Onthis 3-hour walking tour, visit the impressive Plaza de Armas, Plaza de San Francsico Asís, Plaza Vieja and Plaza de la Catedral, discovering the rich and fascinating history of Cuba's captivating capital. You'll also have the chance to wander through the city's vibrant markets.Rum museum visit Shared    Cuba is of course celebrated for its delicious high quality rum and Havana Club is one of the best known brands and has won many international awards. On this short  guided tour you will visit the Havana Club Foundation, a museum recreaton of a typical rum factory where you will discover how rum is processed, from the harvesting of the sugar cane right up to the moment when you drink it.  The tour operates daily with departure time from 09: 00 hrs To 16.00 hrs, duration one hour.Hotel Inglaterra SUNDAY 02 DECEMBERDay at leisure Hotel Inglaterra MONDAY 03 DECEMBERPrivate transfer to Trinidad-The drive takes about five hours.Trinidad is a beautiful colonial town close to Cuba's south coast, with terracotta-tiled roofs, cobbled streets and pastel-coloured buildings. Founded in 1514, the town was originally used as a base for expeditions into the 'New World', its five main squares and four churches date from the 18th and 19th centuries. The town has hardly changed in a century, no suburbs creep out from its historic centre and no high-rise buildings obscure the view to the sea. Home-grown talent fills the squares and music venues in the evenings, when the town comes alive with dancing and the sound of salsa.Trinidad Homestay (simple, 2 night stay)2 x twin room breakfast includeddinner (first night only) included With the colonial masterpiece that is Trinidad attracting increasingly large numbers of visitors, it's been hard for the hospitality sector in Cuba to provide sufficient accommodation. In this city homestays, or Cuban style bed-and breakfasts, have opened the doors of family homes to tourists for some time. A UNESCO protected city, Trinidad has little of the Soviet-style brutalist architecture to be found elsewhere in Cuba and the modest, centrally located homestays are usually establishedin refurbished Spanish colonial houses or newer buildings constructed to the same design, often with balconies, patios or roof terraces. These usually feature traditional furnishings such as wooden rocking chairs and a cosy and bright Cuban Caribbean décor which seems to hark back to the 1950s. Keen to expand their properties, some owners have added simple, modern guest rooms which are not endowed with those features.All however have private bathrooms -water pressure may be weak -and air-conditioning (sometimes a little noisy and with varying degrees of effectiveness). The family may or may not live on the property but someone speaking a little English us usually onhand to provide your breakfast and help you. Some offer dinner, usually  tasty locally-inspired cuisine. There are more modern homestays available in the newer part of town to the south of the centre.  It's not uncommon for one home stay owner to own several houses of a similar standard and cost in the same area, so upon arrival you may find that you will be offered accommodation in a different property.Trinidad colonial city walking tour Half-day private excursion   lunch included Wander through Trinidad's cobbled streets and elegantly crumbling town houses which lead to vibrant plazas frequently filled with music and salsa dancing. As you visit the Plaza Mayor and Museo Romántico, you'll be introduced to the history of this UNESCOWorld Heritage Site, which seems barely touched by the modern world. Stop at an authentic Cuban bar, La Canchánchara to sample a traditional cocktail, before heading off to one of Trinidad's ceramics workshops.  TUESDAY 04 DECEMBERDay at leisure Trinidad Homestay WEDNESDAY 05 DECEMBERPrivate transfer to Havana-The drive takes about five hours.Flight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM0452 Havana Mexico City 15:05 17:20 Non-stop Economy AM=AeromexicoMexico City's Spanish origins date back to 1521, when it was founded on top of the site of the old Aztec capital. Over the last half century more and more of the original infrastructure of the original monumental city has come to light -adjacent to the cathedral and presidential palace in the huge central square -the  Zócalo. The city lies in a basin at 2,250m, rimmed by the Sierra Nevada mountains, and is home to some 20 million inhabitants, a number which continues to grow. Unsurprisingly given its size the capital is composed of a number of contrasting neighbourhoods, from the monumental baroque architecture of the public buildings in the historic centre through the more homely colonial quarters such as tree-lined, cobbled Coyoacan with its galleries and museums, the canals and kitchen gardens of the city's larder at Xochimilco, or the vast leisure area that is Chapultepec Park, featuring exhibitions of pre-Conquest Mexican culture.   Private transfer to your hotelHistorico Central (mid-range, 3 night stay)2 x standard twin room breakfast included This hotel's name tells you that it sitsright in the middle of the capital's colonial core, one block from the city's heart, the huge Zócalo square which hosts the cathedral and from which you have access to a grid of streets with shops, restaurants and night-life.  The property was  opened in 2016 and has already garnered enthusiastic feedback from guests, not least for its exceptional service. With its ornate façade contrasting with clean contemporary interior design and many attractive little touches such as complimentary cafe with basic snacks and Wifi, in-room coffee makers and same-day laundry it claims boutique status but with 81 guest rooms it does not really fall into that category. With its subtle décor and furnishings accommodation is restful and attractive, if some rooms are cosy rather than spacious. Windows are insulated but inevitably owing to the hotel's position there is some impact from the busy streets outside: perhaps a small sacrifice to pay to benefit from accessibility to city attractions. There's a restaurant, fitness room and valet parking.       THURSDAY 06 DECEMBERTeotihuacan pyramids and Guadalupe Shrine Full-day shared excursion    Drive 50km northeast to the archaeological site of Teotihuacán, home to some of the most remarkable relics of ancient civilisation in the world. The immense ruins -dominated by vast pyramids -are thought to date from around 300BC.  The identity of the city's founders and where they came from remains a mystery. It was completely abandoned until the Aztecs arrived, eventually collapsing for good in the 7th century AD. En route you stop at the Plaza de las Tres Culturas (Square of the Three Cultures) in the Tlatelolco neighbourhood. The plaza recognises three periods of Mexican history reflected by buildings: pre-Columbian, Spanishcolonial, and the independent mestizo nation. Continue to the basilica of Guadalupe, a statue of the Virgin Mary atop a hill where a local Christian convert claimed to have seen her in a vision.  Here, pilgrims approach the shrine on their knees across the flagstone courtyard. The most devout make the whole pilgrimage on their knees. (The visit to the Guadalupe shrine may be made first depending on traffic and other local factors). Historico Central FRIDAY 07 DECEMBERPuebla, Tonantzintla and Cholula Full-day private excursion    En route to the World Heritage Site of Puebla, situated 130km southeast of Mexico City, you'll stop in Tonantzintla to visit the Santa María church renowned for its elaborate and unique stucco interior -a beautiful example of indigenous artisan work combining Mexican and European Christian elements. Then you'll continue on to Cholula to visit the remains of the Great Pyramid of Cholula, which measure 450m along each side of the base and is an impressive 65m high, making it larger in volume than Egypt's Cheops pyramid. You'll arrive in Puebla in time for lunch at the traditional La Fonda de Santa Clara restaurant where you'll be encouraged to taste mole poblano-Mexico's national dish -that fuses a flavoursome array of chillies in a thick, rich, chocolate-tinged sauce. Finally, you'll explore Puebla's colonial centre that is lined with churches and provincial mansions, adorned with the delicately hand-paintedtalaveratiles -Puebla's finest attraction. You'll be driven back to Mexico City.Historico Central SATURDAY 08 DECEMBERDay at leisure –latecheck out at hotel confirmed Private transfer to the airportFlight no Departure airport Arrival airport Departure  Arrival  Stops Class AM0007 Mexico City London Heathrow 23:40 15:55 next day Non-stop Economy AM=Aeromexico MORE INFORMATIONHEALTH AND VACCINATION INFORMATIONThe NHS Fit for Travel websiteprovides detailed information, by country, on commonly recommended vaccinations and health issues. We recommend that, where possible, you consult a health practitioner 6-8 weeks before travel for advice specific to your own circumstances.A yellow fever certificate may be a compulsory requirement for immigration purposes, irrespective of whether it is recommended for health reasons. If you are visiting more than one country, it is vital that you check the most up-to-date information. Please ask yourTravel Consultant if you have any doubts. Cases of Zika virus have been reported in parts of Latin America. If you are, or may be, pregnant whilst travelling you should follow the advice of theNational Travel Health Network and Centre. For more information on Zika visit our website.VISASUK passport holders do not require a visa to visit or transit any Latin American country, except Suriname. Requirements for other nationalities vary. Please contact the relevant consulate for guidance. Please also remember to check the requirements both for the countries where you intend to stay andall those in which you will merely transit (i.e. change plane).UK passport holders require a tourist card to enter Cuba(please check the Detailed Itinerary section to see if this has been included).FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH OFFICE The FCO provide country information and the latest travel advice on their website.TRAVEL INSURANCETravel insurance isessential when travelling to Latin America. We recommend a policy organised by Campbell Irvine, further details of which can be found on our website. Many companies do notinclude Cuba as part of their worldwide policies. If travelling to Cuba, please check that your policy covers Cuba and that both emergency repatriation and medical cover on the island are included.ACCOMMODATION RATINGSJourney Latin America’s accommodation ratings are our own, and often based on staff inspection visits. This may not be the same as the classifications the hotels claim for themselves. We may also apply these ratings, in broader terms, to boats. Foran explanation of our ratings, please visit our website.OUR CHARITIESJourney Latin America’s chosen charity is the LATA Foundation, which supports grassroots social and environmental projects throughout Latin America. 100% of your donation goes to the projects, all of which are carefully chosen and aim to relieve poverty through sustainable development and environmental conservation. The Foundation also helps provide emergency relief to affected areas through working with trusted local organisations. Read more about the Foundation’s current projects on ourwebsite. FINANCIAL PROTECTIONWe are a fully bonded tour operator and offer complete financial protection for air travel and holidays. We hold an ATOL licence (2828) and are members of ABTA (V2522) and AITO (5072). When you book an ATOL protected flight or inclusive holiday from us, you will receive an ATOL Certificate. This lists what is financially protected, where you can get information on what this means for you and who to contact if things go wrong. So when you book with us, you can rest assured that your money is completely safe. For more information, visit our website. BOOKING CONDITIONSFor general information relating to our holidays, please read our Booking Conditions.By booking a package holiday you benefit from key rights which can be viewed here. If you’re travelling to Antarctica, we recommend you read our important Before you bookinformation before confirming your holiday.Join our online communitiesandshare your holiday experience with us: Twitter: @JLA_UKInstagram: JourneyLatinAmericaFacebook: JourneyLatinAmericaGoogle+: JourneyLatinAmericaPinterest: JLAUKYouTube: LatinAmericaTVJourney Latin America401 King Street .London .W6 9NJHolidays: 020 8747 8315 .Flights: 020 8747 3108Email: tours@journeylatinamerica.co.uk